---
generated: 2026-03-21T20:45:33Z
generator: pymupdf4llm
source_file: "media/docs/Limerick Chronicle 250th anniversary Docklands 1962 Roche retailer roots Sharon Slater.pdf"
page_markers: true
---

<!-- page 1 -->

**==> picture [1376 x 1692] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Peart fe) they Se :<br>a £8 es ne COO] CD es vearse ie<br>BA ens OLS ee<br>‘Sitti he dock of the bay’ imerick hiends |<br>Sitting on the dock of the bay’: Busy times at Limerick Docklands |<br>In the first week sees ga sen oe naw ane ane eG sinker ose cae Sap tae eee :<br>theDocksone Limerick experienced oeencg neBerarcee Stoesewn rearscot fin | pena: a| : | | SAPs FERENCE DEPT.<br>of its busiest = Faestencifea Fae es aan _<br>years. The total iySage ee oat Prete ah eee |<br>gross tonnage of «= Ae ee ee<br>ships in the Docks ee a Cag cristiano) a n war mba is |<br>approximately SiGeSe coer, Qapema ts yi Mi |<br>various cargoes =<br>totalling near Se a ae fp i> v we 804g | | he ea<br>10,000tons. Al =f . ee = aud.<br>union dock iey fa oe Sa ed<br>workers were poe cn ae StS 7<br>fully employed OO Ze ee Sea rm |<br>cameDenmark, from Russia etapaoe eghes eeemotes Se|Se ony sien a epee ag S e ma ES RE aNeea a agreSaoaSS SSeeSSee ee ne |<br>—_—______—. ————----~ | ‘the city, biti inowih This morning, at his reaidence, in Lower Glentworth-strees,<br>FROM THE ARCHIVES soap, Bat aewell nro | werecccer Goce, Boag. fee WES Or tes aiey Lingericky aa &<br>iiceaaneaseaiathiata ia ataaiines i iiitaiiieiaiamiaaee mommcemeommeess | Street, A contemporary re- | Magistrate of the Borough, also Life Commissioner of Bt. -<br>onBRON abe= membprinc e redand venture”him as and“a mercFr. W h iteant | Michael's,demise of thisand highlyPresidentge straof the Limerickgentleman,Institution.whose life,Thefor<br>: aaa snriid Het hive as coe ukthe most.-|_ asus scnatal has been closely identified. with the welfare: of |<br>Pipe Pa successful ‘businessman in |. Limerickand warmly devoted<br>SLA ary tt aputhern Teelandeat thattmm: ' Innst elicit an expression of universalto the best sympa in t hyerests and ears’of Ireland, from ||<br>LIMERICK ofa ; ?; 5 nent order, aud derive ditional lustre im public ss well as<br>)(7 [ate] yy Until recently, it was believed that his geal deol gh His pup re endowments hy of angas<br> CHRONICLE HISTORIAN x peesBache.oebeamed private society from patriotic sentiment, refined apny’ and<br>HE Roche merchant | grdousjourney. stestank Tiand te lease ie land tholic gentleman in Ireland appointed to the commission of<br>family left theirmarkon | " whijehissons Stephen and Philip eS the Granary. in fact, hilt the pees for a carporate a oy al he waa elected mem-<br>Limerick society from | remained in Limerick, John con- | Roche took out 2 lease for the aa ber for his native city in December, 1832, which he continued to<br>the mid-eighteenth to | tinued the family business in Dublin | of999 years on 25 March 177g from | ‘epresent in three Parliaments, with undeviating integrity, and,<br>tury. early nineteenth cen- | and Thomas in Rotterdam. Stephen | Edmond Sexton Pery and quickl we shall add, for the benefit of hig constituents, without a eom-<br>John Roche and his wife Anne | was the father of William Roche of | beoan his develo ee of the se ler of honor or principle, for the period of nearly teu years.<br>Stackpool had four sons: Stephen, | Roche's Hanging Gardens fame. bs gE the i building in r. Roche took leave of pablic life ia ely, 1841; and it was a<br>Philip, John and Thomas, all of who | john and Anne also had two daugh- | 1727," Fepeny botdng remarkable Incident in his political career, that when pressed<br>would become _ independently | ters: Christina and Anastasia. Ana- | Some Limerick Catholic families | ' 4e¢lare-himeelf a Repedier, upon the eve of an election, and<br>wealthy<br>John Snrin their was describedown right. stasis marriéd another’ Limerick ii'aa the Avthurs andiinches: b when his retarn was threatened by the championsof that mea-<br>chant as a mer- | merchant, Ignatius Nihell, who was | wereprominent in business before | 've:,the late Daniel O'Connell declared in Limerick that<br>seenhuge ship,prince.the Inlargest 1755, ofits he fittedkind everouta |  notlaws, as successfulhaving lost ashis hisfo b r tunoth e r-in-and || actthe allowedCatholic ReliefCatholicsAct t o f1778.inheritThis or | “"e0l4Williamnot. Rochedemand wes 5ee the only manineeeIreland fromti whomnaehe |<br>to  in Limerick, and dispatched it | ending up in debtor's prison in Eng- | purchase land. Although, it was also aie wil be interred in theeo vault of his family<br>the West Indies. He had it | landin1769, not unusual for any merchant, no Cathedral of Limerick, on Mondsy next.<br>mounted with 14 sixteen-pounder His son Philip Roche, born March ere<br>guns to fend off pirates on its haz- | 23, 1820, left his mark throughout CONTINUEDON THE NEXT PAGE -> On April 27, 1850 the Chronicle recorded the death of merchant William Roche<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>

<!-- page 2 -->

**==> picture [1328 x 1690] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
LIMERICK LEADER we limerickleader.ie Saturday, April 7, 2018<br>TheRoche family leftits st Li ick<br>—> CONTINUED FROM PAGE1 feer es Sst caer ie ee Bd Sb ae eee emer § cluding in 1809 Charlotte<br>matter their religion, totake 99 998 ee fei onn ee er aT rE Uy oie hc en ee eee §6©6mOnd. William died unmar-<br>outowningleases plotsas outright.opposed to aetiapettel ey cites eae,te i aak ao ohPe ee eeee eeea ee Eeeetlie eeeeee §©61850= ried andhe  childlessdid not leaveon Aprilinstruc- 27,<br>Philip had excellent vision $999 030 ue Re es «éttions for the upkeep of his<br>when it came tofinancialin- [790 a oae NN a ee| gardens. As a result his gar-<br>vestments. He wasanadven- [2s be See Se Ss dens were sold and dis- |<br>turer, importerandexporter a3) , a cae po, eerSM ea ee ee mantled soon after his<br>offlax, cerealsandseeds,and [|] S| Eee Se OM death.<br>one of the most successful ee ia j rer ee es ie eee OE race Or oe ait ame aah p ce ate ger eee ae William's brother and<br>business figures of his day. ss = BRS See ee aoe eete  -~SCé#uiness partner Thomas<br>He used the Granary ware- eS if Set iB ene fe: Be fe: i), §~=-Roche’s outlived him by five<br>he traded in, which he x + nets GS aeeetieer Oe<br>mostly E ae teens a.Se mes ~—sC Chronicle on December 15,<br>supplied to the gov 7": dae: A eames ane |S ep read<br>ernment.Just aes. gs y Se et Say Tee iB i iaoe Gren eee “This morning, at. his<br>had like his father, Philip ae Ne ao ane (fae: uth. Wee ec ae ody mo... ‘house in George’s-street,<br>hazardoushis own trouble with ~~ Si: 86 ey ae j pel | | : Le ilehe.ey m= —S—téafter a short illness, in his<br>West trading to the <= : ‘Sete ce ie a) Pyekee 3) TEAS PO Bias See=o... 87th year, Thomas Roche,<br>Indies. In 1799;"“when<br>England | goer te ee apse eo oe fen cre : Vite peae asoan dl “955-> Esq. elder brother ofWilliam<br>land  wasatwarwithHol w= ae Cees ae | ee 4 Pie = en ee Roche, Esq. M.P. for thiscity,<br>Philip sent outtwo 9 20 8 oy sate * eo es itesome<br>ships es HE: | Seek te, if oe fo eas ooo =edeceased, and surviving<br>the from Limerick under oma oS IRIS ee 6 9 2 tere ee ec ei Wer EB es ie ‘<*> .-._— partner ofthe late highly re-<br> Dutch flag. These ships p47 co GRC cn as ai Saree Fat ony ita ae: 13 + tye Sspectable and independent<br>werevaluedseized and the goods ‘gimme «= ey | tek oem came] eect eS ee, hate \ >. See Bank [of][Thomas] and William<br>vided amongat £15,000 were di- <= = ae! sieere 4 bahia wes etePiva ies tee Roche, ofLimerick, the only<br>the British fleet 4 ax a rea Ses Bt Eeeici A; eae one, probably,<br>and in the South of<br>see  army. Even herewecan a ae | | iesaeSEEK : ewe: a et 6 oie _ Treland, that passed through<br> how wealthy Philip was, * ae. * if Parag Eee ae Oe Wee cA eee i= 35 at 2 ee oo * the disastrous commercial<br>trading in goods ofthat value ‘{ @See) iS tate uaets heek 0's : een ga2 ; = Saget emif ‘<i Meee = crash of private banks 40<br>when his ground rent forthe<br>St _ a weit, ie PS iy peor aon Ra os a ui Poa eno red + ee ; years ago, with perfect honor<br>Michael's area was just gue. Tiguummhs (hi steels CClpee oc aMan aeand integrity. Mr Thomas<br>The Limerick Chronicle . 2)<br>reported oe } meee ee ( mre tes Be ‘ea SEBS... ee aeeet ED eae a gentleman ofhighly cultiv-<br>Roche's death on a | iL a: = Seem; Pa ee ee Je oe ate Lae Ssh lage (ietye ated mind and of strict moral<br>at “On Sunday morning, died ‘ 3 f iy pee. fe: b Seow g pig SOota ay Ae har cheer teed eal be frmmex business transactions. His<br> his seat at Newcastle, after . oe vie oO enact aatde Soke eeepote ie nee ra © ooo ae a aa f domestic life was pure and<br>shortJohn, illness, Philip Roche ba BARR tara eefe(epee.betge okcape ee “53% @eeg irreproachable, his- politics<br>knownasoneofthemostex-Esq, of this City, well “2eeo, 1: sh GIR eA Ss 01«herceetag con ca oe ae ae ae ever liberal and consistent.”<br>tensive sf?) + cs Beatie eaehee Pe eS as peicehe ice ; wyeomee §€=6=— The life of his brother<br>Merchants in the ; “ota . £ PY ot fyedohgera Peet ges Beets aprgone SMe ae a a James Roche was recorded<br>Kingdom.—Panegyric,which in<br>aste | RIE VaR eae peak ne Sar HF ogee aes Se saigemee the Chronicle on April 1,<br>upon the dead, was never et = s , pees ns ee pee. ee =6p.s “Mr JamesRoche wasborn .<br>more justly applied than to iti wwe.) 0 el RE : ee ome in Limerick some eighty<br>his character; by his. de- ee ai sancivrasamnninns oe sseeesaniuie hire years ago, of an ancient<br>industrious Farmer as well The Granary on Michael Street was built in 1787 by Philip Roche. It was used as a warehouse until the 1970s. In February1980 --©##ly period ofhislife,he was<br>_<br>as the numerous Poor have the Shannon Free Airport Development Company bought the entire building, which was extremely dilapidated. The Limerick itt Pade gehen<br>lost a inndedgeneralaFathers,eevaluable besta goodand =friend,thesagasandWo wisehis  \jbraryééTheserelocated shipsto° the  werebuilding in seized1985. after anda redevelopment the costinglishment£3 millionand in 1966, this . of e600,000 today. yevisit to—studies otto irelandiran completingheingMeescvettleda short hisOfin<br>Man. — His remains were in- goods valued at £15,000 were was taken over by Allied Irish The garden sat on aseries Bordeaux, where he became<br>terred in the Family vault in divided h eee h Banks. “ ofvaulted roofed stores. The acquainted with the most<br>Drumbanny Church-yard.” tw 4 aMmong t € Britis fleet and Not only was William a floor of the garden Was distinguished leaders of the<br>Jim Kemmy wrote that army” banker, but he was the first flagged and cemented to- Girondists. Mr Roche was in<br>Philip was a “charitable man Catholic M.P. for Limerick. gether, and excess water was Paris during the horrors of<br>(who) frequently gave grain Heenteredgovernmentonio leadoutofthegardenbylead the first Revolution, and in<br>to the starving people of the popularly known as a wine exporting company December 1832 and left 23 pipes to prevent leakage to 1793 was arrested there as a<br>city.” His last will and testa- Maunsel's Bank, which was from Bordeaux, France. June 1841. He was good the stores below. The soilin British subject, but was re-<br>ment give a sense of his located at No 6 Bank Place. § While in France, James friends with Daniel O’Con- some ofthe terraces went up leased on the death of Robes-<br>caring for both members of This bank wasestablishedin wasimprisonedfor6months nell, who would stay with to 5 foot deep. The garden pierre.<br>hisfamilyandhiswidercom- 1789 and ultimately failed in in France during the French him when-he was visiting was heated and cooled by a For some years after his<br>munity can be seen. He also the banking crash of 1820. Revolution. After his release, Limerick. Daniel O'Connell series of flues, channels, liberation, he passed histime<br>set out a provision to repay Philip was the uncle tothe James returned to Ireland once declared, “William vents and windows. Due to between Parisand Bordeaux.<br>the sum of the debts of his banking Roche’s, who had and went into business with Roche was the only manin their sturdy construction At the close of the last cen-<br>deceased brother Thomas. buildings atwhatisnowg7to another brother Stephen in Irelandfromwhomhewould these vaults were allocated tury, he returned to Ireland,<br>garetPhilip Roche married Mar- 99 O'Connell Street. It was at Cork. James and Stephen ngt demanda pledge” as air raid shelters during and commenced business in<br>dren, Kelly and hadtwochil- the rear of these building married the Moylan sisters While in government, he the Second World War. Cork as a banker, in partner-<br>John Philip and that his nephew William of Cork. John (d.1825) and was very vocal on issues sur- On top of these vaults sata ship with his brother. He<br>Margaret.only son byPhilip9 years.outlivedSo thehis builthangingthegardens,famouswhichRoche’sare tooknessin overDublin.his  Whileafinalfather’s busi- ofroundingthe Catholics,the emancipationJews, and connectedseriesof terracesby stairways. which wereOn __ residedtryseat innear a handsomethe rivercoun-Lee,<br>Granary building was be- being redeveloped atthemo- brother, Richard (d.1803) opposed slavery. He was a_ the bottom terrace grew a and there amassed a<br>queathed to his extended ment. took hold orders. There were Magistrate for Limerick and _variety of flowers. While the splendid library... Mr Roche<br>family, the Kellys. Philip William Roche (1775-1850) _ also five Roche sisters. the first Roman Catholic in middle terraces were where after this he resided in<br>Roche was married to Mar- Was born in Limerick to In 1801, William and  IrelandtobecomeaCommis- he grew pears, apples, London as Parliamentary<br>garet Kelly, the daughter of ‘Stephen Roche and his Thomas set up a bank in sioner of the Peace. During plums, and various types of agent. He also spent several<br>JohnerectedKelly, merchant, who Second wife SaralrO’Brienin Charlotte's Quay, Limerick. his political career, he would _vegetables, with a section in _yearsin Paris, and witnessed<br>Chapel the altarinSt Mary's Limerick. His mother was Afewyearslater,theybought stay at 5 Duke Street, West- thecentreformelonsandcu- _ the revolution of 1830. Even-<br> in 1760. John Kelly's the heir to large estates in buildingonO’Connell Street, minster, London. cumbers. The top terraces of tually he returned to Cork,<br>son Michael was married to Rathkeale, Co. Limerick and which they used as their Today we remember Wil- thegardenswerehothouses, where he performed the du-<br>Christina Roche, sister of Tuamin Galway. — bankas wellastheirhomes. liam Roche for his famous conservatories and glass- ties of a magistrate and dir-<br>Philip Roche who was then William and his brothers = During the 1819-1820 Na- garden. In 1808, he built his houses. Herehegrewgrapes, ector of the National Bank<br>the uncle twice of Thomas Were keenfinanciers,heand tional Bank Crash,they were impressive gardento the rear pineapples, peaches and or- until his death in the early<br>Kelly. three of his five brothers the only bank to survive in of his bank on O'Connell's anges. At its highest point part of 1853.”<br>Philip Roche also built a Went into banking. Thomas Limerick. In 1824, they were Street. It stretched to Henry the garden reached 70 feet The Roche family are re-<br>number of houses on Bank (1768-1855) was in partner- the only bank recorded in Street and covering approx- above street level. membered today chiefly for<br>PlaceBank and Rutland Street. ship with William in Lim-  Pigott’s Trade Directory of imatelyone acre of land. The These gardens were vis- the Granary building, the<br>from Place takes its name erick. George (1860-1846) Limerick. In 1825, Provincial garden cost £15,000 at the ited by almost every notable Hanging Gardens and<br>the Bank of Limerick, 24 James (1770-1853) set up Bank acquired their estab- time, which is the equivalent visitor to Limerick, in- Roche's Street.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>