---
generated: 2026-03-21T20:39:11Z
generator: pymupdf4llm
source_file: "media/docs/census for whites in 1911 in ireland.pdf"
page_markers: true
---

<!-- page 1 -->

**==> picture [2 x 31] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
|<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**==> picture [1539 x 854] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
H , ie<br>i -<br>'<br>,<br>‘ CENSUS OF IRELAND, 1911- q<br>Two Examples of the mode of filling up this Table are given on the other side. |<br>FORM A. No. on Form B._ { |<br>RETURN of the MEMBERS of this FAMILY and their VISITORS, BOARDERS,’ SERVANTS, &c., who slept or abode in this House on the night of SUNDAY, the 2nd of APRIL, tot. | |<br>: - : Dumb only<br>NAME AND SURNAME to Head of tpn EDUCATION AGE (last Birthday) RANK, PROFESSION, OR PARTICULARS AS TO MARRIAGE WHERE BORN. | IRISH LANGUAGE. | !!Deaf andDumb;; )<br>eee eee,  ee eeFamily. EEPROFESSION.  LS, j and SEX. OCCUPATION.a ateat _— ~~! ImbeeileBlindor; Idiot;<br>Insert Age opposite State for each Married Woman or Lunatic.<br>, :<br>No 2nd,Personsto be entered ansent onhere; the NightEXCEPT of Sunday,those (notApril enu- State whether | State here the particular, Re- eachof Males oe,innile columnAges6  | StateTrade,theorparticular other EmploymentRank, Profession,of each entered onnumberthis ofSchedule :— the “Taran”Write thein wordthis re [a][oe]<br>merated elsewhere) who may be out at Work or “ Head of ligion, or Religious Denom- and the Ages of : person. Children or young persons column opposite the }<br>& TRAVELLING, de., during that Night, and who ps P ae re aie to which each person | — Females in column 7. attending a School, or receiving , name of each person<br>3 RETURN Home oN Monpay, APRIL 8x, ‘ Vife,” elongs. State here whether he i mas regular instruction at home, should Whether Completed Children bornaliveto] If in Ireland, state | who speaks lnisn<br>=} . es . Son,” [Members of Protestant De- or she can * Read | For Infants under one be returned as Scholars. ** Married,” years the | _present Marriage. in what County or | only,and the words | Write the respec-<br>iz, Subject to the above instruction, the Name of the} “ Daughter, nominations are requested and Write,” can | year state the ege in | [No entry should be made in the case « Widower,” " present If no children born | City; if elsewhere, | “Inisu & Encuisu” | tive infirmities<br>Head of the Family— written first; Ae ol to describe themselves f Read only, or | months, as “ under 1 of wives, daughters, or other female «“ Widow,” Marriage alive, write * None" | state the name of | opposite the names of | opposite the name .<br>then the names of his Wife, Children, and} Relative; y the vague term “ Protes- | “Cannot Read. month,” “1 month,” | relatives solely engaged in domestic | or “Single.” | has lasted in column 11, the Country. those who can speak | of the afllicted<br>other Relatives; then those of Visitors, * Visitor, - tant,” but to enter 5 the a 2 months,” ” &c. duties: at home.] If less —_ 4 both languages.* - In person.; »<br>Boarders, Servants, &c, **“Servant,Boarder, aratename ofDenomination,the Particularor Before filling this column you are re- vent,enonewrite Total Children ethanshould beennen madebe entity in :\ |<br>&e, y to which they belong.] Ages Ages uested to read the instructions on “under | Children still this column.<br>of of the other side, one.” born livi<br>Christian Name. Surname. Males. Females. alive. ing. ;<br>. —EE — . a = - — ~ — a ——— rr es ns a f ;<br>1. 2. 8. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. we (1 oT Sa 13. 14. 15. t<br>.<br>i ‘<br>rcex\ - {/ , We rr ate . | \ ————<br>Pata<br>|\/9 Deut, \Go on. the Lal) % bert : A a? ie Pir ooacd |Z | = Orhe+STiin, —aa \<br>(Man Wn in an Oat Wa wate | ey Pram Caalenthn =<br>pf 2 25°. . Uy 71 7 ’ : er ’ V = | , ; j ~ ,<br>z . > } aa |<br>j i p y = 7 y, : Pr [a] [ee] [eS] - - . : ny4 cXe. Fa: {== Wfpjet7 [an,] [-/] [rf] ii<br>BR ee, | See" argh ba i al Code Wea Te [ed]<br>A j Trt 4G “eh LANG / ‘ y s r J . -<br>Sere p 7<br>Q pbb caun V [hcds] A Ceittattaan Cedar tottde| = ILA | C o t oF 8 Sella de | (Vsa 0 be \<br>——8| -——___—ore—- ated — - —| -— —-- _ ——_-j—_-_ _-- ———__ - ——— _————$—$—$——$$$ ||} | —ji—_ - - |-«——---- -— -— —- - ~ - - |<br>rey x<br>7 am ey a ‘2 Pao | ee | i<br>|<br>¢ — ns —<br>moetri8 | Ua :<br>—- : beers ee<br>10 | | |<br>a a a a |<br>‘6 ae eS ee ae) ee a,<br>| |<br>aig SS a aee oe oe << | See<br>1 | | |<br>15 |<br>I hereby certify, as required by the Act 10 Edw. VII., and 1 Geo. V., cap. 11, I believe the foregoing to/be # true Ret<br>that the foregoing Return is correct, according to the best of my knowledge and ; ; ly<br>belief. 4 be Y§F/ a P Pe f<br>as Re: 5 UM, / L, . --Signature of Head of Family.<br>;<br>“toned LOE g LHiZ ip, 2 Signature of Enumerator. v (4 ng 3<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>