---
generated: 2026-05-07T09:57:02Z
generator: pymupdf4llm
source_file: "media/docs/manual-scans-2026-05/uffindell-cormick-persia-v2-george-medical-education-5pg.pdf"
page_markers: true
---

<!-- page 1 -->

Medical StudCnt George tr William ick died in Decemb ‘ear yer Corml™ mber 1877 his chilat on only his married daughter Louisa was Wife Tamar was forty-seven ve , albert, Se ial il vas Over twenty-one. Hj; n years old. Of his five cnarie* Shireen arriet and Henry, were sixteen fourt "ts other children, namely Ge[€] | ; year before his father’ years old respectively at[the] nd of January 1877, almost a > “Ourteen, eleven and nine btn 6 givet or had bought, a Birthday Book into which, over many ye “T'S death, George Cormick had been ©" on the appropriate dates. This book with its scr Years, the names of[family][ and][ friends] pe enter" d on 20 March 18 Scriptural reference - would peer. Jife. Indeed on arch 1878 George Cormick S Suggests a religion orge S F d CK was confirmed b he R} Bl0us aspect to Ger'* "Church, Kilburn. Four days later at St. Paul’s Church © by the Bishop of London at Holy Trineceived oly Communion for the first time.’ Altho Sed etha ue one at Hammersmith , he Church of Engl ugh baptised in the Armeni ere now’oi ember of the Church of England. an Church in Persia he was although George no longer had William to guide him in his choi allow nis father and grandfather into the medical profession. Both Tohn a of career he had decided to - hasic qualification needed to practise medicine in Britain at the tim i ee gamihad gained more than and also became a Member of the Royal College ofSurgeons OMCs inn served an apprenticeship rater became Licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries (LSA) and MRCS While William forty years pecome 4 doctor the medical profession had been somewhat reformed and medi ae George wanted to baa[aoe][ education][ rationalized] rjlowing the passing of[the][ Regulation][ of][Qualifications][ of] The Act established an annual published Regist yore edicine and Surgery Act in =7 gister, a disciplinary code and the General Medical The General Medical Council designated prelimina . These ‘acluded obtaining a degree in natural science at asera a8 medical— -xamination of London University, a university matriculation eaabaa pcarsey UT examination from a medical or surgical corporation. of & generat: education In September 1879 at the age of eighteen George Cormick Natit nee passed the prel he Diploma ofMRCS of England. As well as the compulsory subjects of E : ; mcr dieser history, h jects or English, mathematics, English European geography and Latin, candidates had to choose at least one but no more than four out of six optional subjects: translations from Greek, French or German, mechanics, chemistry, and botany with zoology. George took French, chemistry and botany with zoology. George could now neces. his professional education ‘by attendance at a recognised Medical School and Hospital or in any other mode authorised by the regulations ofthe College [ofSurgeons] ’. On doing so he was required to register at the office of the General Medical Council.” Six months later he would also satisfy the examiners in mechanics. On |! October 1879 George began his medical studies at London’s University College Hospital (UCH), founded in 1834 some six years after the University of London was established. He registered at the Medical Council Office on 3 October and was given his Medical Student Certificate which was a copy of his entry in the Medical Student’s Register.’ Over the four years of his medical studies at UCH George attended courses in physiology, anatomy, chemistry, practical chemistry, botany, practical physiology, hospital practice, medicine surgery, material medicine, midwifery, pharmacy, medical jurisprudence, pathological anatomy and practical surgery. A contemporary[estimate] :[ of][the][ cost][ of][a][ medical] |[ student’s][ education] 10g)[ including][ rent] y and[ and] p[ living][ expenses] gery[ was] about £700°, though George was probably spared the rent expenses by living at home. In July 1882 at the age of twenty-one George passed the Royal College of Surgeons’ Primary Examination in anatomy and physiology for the Diploma of MRCS. Of the 132 men who took the examination just seventy-nine passed.” Four months later he resigned from the 20" Middlesex Rifle Volunteer Corps (Artists), returning ‘into store in good order’ the rifle, bayonet and sling issued to him. This unit had been raised in London in 1859 as part of a widespread volunteer movement in response to a perceived threat of a French invasion. Originally the volunteers were artists, musicians, actors and architects but later included lawyers and doctors. Service was entirely voluntary and the men were not liable to serve overseas, but they had to attend regular drill meetings and annual camp. How long west Cormick had been a member of the corps is not known, and 1s possible he was one of the 800 -" . the Corps at the camp held over Easter 1880 at Aldershot where his uncle John had died— eaean cases George continued to study at UCH, obtaining in May 1883 a certificate for sen a artes ofmidwifery ‘many ofwhich were attended with unusual difficulties’. He appears to 97 a

<!-- page 2 -->

THE CORMICK FAMILY IN PERtRSIA examinations 7 1884 and 1885 though in which subjects and the tesul ] for the Diploma of MRCS In b°* » ate Noy artis 10 inimum registerable ificat; a Medical Amendment Act redefined the vidwifery f-i F cotporstion at (0 Pract: edicineIn 1886 Medica se in medicine,4 surgery and midawitemidv iol Fin1On Or aniversityyn: Ie«1° United as a diploma or degr dical Council. In Scotland the qualifying CXaminan the rg Kingdom recognised by the General Met tr amalgamated with the Re tionge a) College of Physicians of Edinburgh had aire oh sicians and Surgeons of Glass. College, of Surgeons[0] f Edinburgh and with those of the Faculty ol k : h in May 1886 he passed BOW. It Was to Scotland ‘ck went and where in Edinburg Sed the Secon4 that George Cormick we '2 Finally on 20 October 1888, having been ary ination on his way to qualifying as a “xen inal Examination, he received his q; Ue of the — . t of eighty-four candidates to pass the Fina f Edinbur hand ofthe oe F 7 diploma as a if he Roval Colleges ofPhysicians and Surgeons ene Se 0 G S th aculty ofPhYSician ce together with a certificate in Midwifery. eorge then returned home to Lena ey somber 1888 he registered these qualifications with the Medical Council forEngland, '3 rT koran7 December . ick had qualifiedt | " te years obtaining his medical student's certificate George Cormi q » Practice as a docto, though he had not become a MRCS. Ss 4 | « | “4 ne ‘ x , ph G: it ha " ads Y, , ¥ GP {5 ae rare 4 Sy ne wy ae Re — (een Sh GP AD oncoirnOU ‘. r ‘ iy A i, Mp, )) ¥ ay ( "ee A * A rN Er aa om Nat ys LAY 4 | a all if eS wy ie ! ‘ } wees ; ae BS ae v4 PS As oi fa ii Vat Was ; x Wao. ye | a, bed (aiepas Wt o-—“Sueteeaers «ill sciatica | 3 4 : ff athe we i Rare SVINVIRGENGE, tea : e **e** eee Na A i EDINBURGENSE.A> a iy SHASSUENSIS,4 ; Bisce lderve fteotatuy trie Har te rnnatganen | | dvereint arasatttnitt Viens oy ny ie ‘pre eo i Zo irene Probus cy :a i ; ; ot “a aie preys ete-perasis permit acne =H aoecnPrien ee pts: Bye on ISmeruin Braciptoucnn swstets lesen eS Cio, [ire Newman ie Te) a ‘ poariaceaes Sfocipiendonna paryaee d. Ai FiRus (rtee wagona . irons at Tamisciin ect i :re SF wy Crinbarw bis a ne 2 | ‘ l Mader hay , (J { ) Ua ie wRUR vv" "7, : Ris Angitirae ropaccatme moe. | caeio i spe ate heres, pM > “ tei yo “geomet wis en . ny ane rLeaymay an cabatts Leomarnagy nail sony ' k See UNS, Art yh S54 Wesius $ Neos .; Srahicras in Qondenin SARE HATE ccttragertpaiane 04Snevnnnt ooee Si a ; Di DIELS {or fila RMrwp ayy ait Jt¢ SS EPO MERE OOO Meet RANG | iensie 2 bya oer Naima : ca ue ve 4 =N $ A é # ow LAE. Prvws or ?) heb Ase SNe Wnatioanes "ended Marita Phaewes .Ce em ; Rt 3 ».hod Be Het isCy, a ertie \" VasTossa (ote Phy Sortetaeme | ‘ Ploy Tt akias Vion, Sreaportay ; = — | , iv d oe as et 4; LMM RIO ha AREN 0185 AOS loATMEE EM ALE +55 bate alla wis MOE ESS Z George Cormick’s Medical Diploma g p a While George had been studying his younger brothers and sister had attended school and the family had kept in contact with relatives in Persia. 4 , 4 In 1880 Anna and Fanny Burgess visited Britain once again. In March that year Anna was , interviewed in Leicester by a relative or someone close to the Burgess family.'* Mother and daughter a remained in Britain for more than a year. In early April 1881 they were in Dundee, Scotland, with Burgess a relatives James and Margaret Davidson. ' It is almost certain that Anna came with her daughter to London — Fannyto see her taken Sisterin Bedford Tamar and and herinscribed Cormick‘7, relatives. She gave or sent to Tamar a photograph ofherselfwith o Mrs Cormickfrom her sister Mrs Burgess’. 

98

<!-- page 3 -->

DEN GEORGE y MEDICAL STUDR y+ ~~ . s[hee][a] Anna and Fanny Burgess sens April 1881 Tamar Cormick was living on the i ; Gat Hammersmith Grange Gardens hadom muisiad citehena es ee het a "edical student George, and Charles andiertaie ae : Ouses numbered. With Tamar were ; ae were her married daughter Louisa, her son in law a om were attending school. Also living ving on ‘inte aa two children Alfred aged six and five year old Rose. Louisaee[rin][ we][eh][ mi] ramat’s other daughter, Harriet was boarding at a nearby school in a Cence po)[os] Hammersmith Grove, just west of the Kensington and Richmond railway siteine it a rere ae” Hammersmith station. The school occupied two houses, then numbered 86 and 88, and was te by Jane Peters and her niece. In addition to these two schoolmistresses were a governess, cook a and -_ant. Most of the twenty-three pupils, all girls aged from ten to twenty-two, had b a but had, like Harriet Cormick, been bom abroad.” ee ee **e** one other ad, CK, en orn abroad. ‘Named Portland College, the school had b en astablished in 1873 and was advertised as °: qa superior establishment, in one ofthe healthiest suburbs ofLondon, foryoung ladies who receive a sound education. Good professors attend daily. ... Good playground. At this time both Harriet’s brothers Charles and Henry were pupils at University College School close to the hospital where their elder brother George was a student. Charles was fifteen and Henry twelve when they began their education at this school, in 1879 and 1880 respectively. Charles left University College School after just two years, Henry after three.'” In 1880 a letter addressed to William Cormick was passed to his executor Peter Bell. Written on 31 May, it was from John Cormack, William’s cousin, who had emigrated to Australia from Ireland and in 1880 was in charge of the Queensland Museum in Brisbane.’ In eight closely written pages, the last two of which were also written over at right angles, a then common way of saving postage costs, John lurched from one topic to another: his meeting with William and brother John at Waterford in 1841; Irish history; his lack of business success in Australia; and his sixteen children and their families.” He promised to enclose photographs of his family but in a note added a week later said he would send them when he had collected them together. a Se Bes te The main reason John Cormack had written was that William had been a creditor in his insolvent estate at Dalby which had just been wound up. John had been the proprietor of the Royal Hotel in Dalby, some 100 miles west of Brisbane. William was to receive £9 13s 6d in dividends on the debt Jaire pe cle him” John stated that he had two cheques for William totalling that amount re fart previous correspondence that William must have left England by the time ofthis letter John wou learn where William was before sending the cheques. 99

<!-- page 4 -->

> +k CORMICK FAMILY IN PERSIA er is stralian relative, | y ave been intrigued by this Austra ec. In 1881} 3 ff 9 April\thatnyeyeOPC in English by his paternal aunt Mary Cassabois in Tabriz23 Ved g lett rq 7 My dear aatee nany happy Ester, with all your family. “eq L | pe ia oe J wish you many Wert” . with vour likeness, and return ' \ private papers: Church « receives . ‘ - ; Qa , 9 Volume One, an have pived your kind letter Wun ) YOU many th pri Ce Che ! .m smessot tO sent19 yousend one.mypresent fortag? aphs. Iam, sorry—_ to sayreid thatof there) is no One hens Jrfo l **a** keg ag .. 2 ale4 bid, Medicalpapers: StudentRCS ce ikene. aie very glad to hear that you have got over a & eal of the difficulty r y s Keetley, CB.., The St = George[t] Las so my easurin dearest ee to work hard and don’t loose one minute from your work. finish jy beg You ’ (sing 2 simple purct : , Pe wn as Yo 7 setehilees J xt You asked me to sendyou thefortagraph which Mr. John Cormick sent to me : 4 6 The Times \1 ul os h, nor any letters from him. Srom Ay . 1 private papers: Mic > not received any fortagrap”, Stra]; 8 hot Military bere W‘e are all well and in good health.: ee I hope you° are° all° the same. = ‘. _va papers: Ut° Cassabois, Onorin Bernay joins me sending their kindest love to you, Toms zRCS: index to[B] Louisa Minasagan Aga, and to all dear childrens. Abel and Henry kiss your hand Shanon 7 (The Examinati 1am dear George your Affectionate Aunt , \ rt Seokees: MEGAIE Mary Cassaboiss 7 Thesis (2004) So Mary’s married daughter Honorine Bernay was in Tabriz and appears to have had 7 7The peg: ce and Henry. While nothing more is known of Abel, Henri Bernay was born on 22 May 187ae Sons, Abe 7 — > ' Emile Bernay was the French Consul at Tabriz whom a French traveller to Persia desctibeq Their father 4 \4 New York[I] remarkable intelligence. He has lived in Persiaforseveral years, speaks the language of the 8 ‘consy) * 7 John Hendk ease and knows the Persian character inside out. Country eit \ 5 Scotland 2 After qualifying as a doctor in October 1888 George returned to London, to Axm: 7 a Ibid, RG , Vale, a k ype Mster Ho | a ‘8 Daily Te Acton, where his mother was then living. Mnatzakan and Louisa Hakoumoff haq aa USE, The . a Teer two children to a rented house, 28 per IN SE just south of The Vale26 Ved with their 4 2 Private ‘ey e obtained references iro . a London.” ova a aie e, professor ofmedici = a a saat University < . 4 Paco College Hospital,On 16 Februarywrote: . Prone, p he and surgery, and physician i UniversityOllege, 97 Theredivids Mr. George Cormick while a student at University College Hospital acted as My clinica] pte: A it gives me pleasure to state that he discharged the duties of the post with zeal & oie 7 and , 3 ee clinical clerk assisted the house physician in the medical wards. He was usual} . 7 ac fourth year and watched certain medical cases assigned to him in the wards ale inthe thirg Or | 9 mn a . reported to the physician. : Upon th:em and ,\3 21 py S Beck, 17 wrote: Five months later, on 15 July, the professor of surgery and surgeon to the hospital, Marcy B 4 28 7 at 7 arian weropr ghar in sido College H[ospital][ and][ it][ gives][ me][ gre][at][ plearir:] thorough I formed a high opinion of iS C aracter & ability. He possesses in my opini 4 hospital orknowledgeprivate pract ofh **i** ce.sprofession & is well qualified to undertake the care ofpeerspati eitherpa in 3\ 3 nee y_ 79 in m youre or third year, a dresser’s duties were with surgical patients and consisted of 7 £ ut mainly bandaging, dressing wounds and otherwise assisting the surgeon : , In July 1889 the Shah of Persia visited Britain for the second time He 3 3 1 country. During his stay in London he was entertained at the opera theatre bya ube: \ display of fireworks at the Crystal Palace before his departure He had s or an satis ae \ Windsor, met deputat 3 , an audience with the Queen at , 4 , ions of Armenians from Manch 103 a gy England and Scot! } | ester and LondOn, visited historicistor country seat . L1a49 nti and and toured the indust iti ae ia Birmingham, rial cities : | 3 leave Sheffield and Leeds before travelling to Bri vs the north such as Liverpool, Manchester, | 3 of the Queen at Osbourne then sailed to te te quand on to the Isle ofWight. There he tok \ Whether this visit by the Shah cena= where he attended the Great Exhibition in Paris. | 3 already made his plans. He applied for and : 2N Fea continent. tbe eae next move is notknown: he bape 7 

> The previous week his moth ae Ovember 1889 was issued with a passport for travel to the | er Lamar had also obtained a similar passport.” 7 After sixte : , “1 years in London, G 3 as corge : : | 3 a fully qualified doctor ; 5©, accompanied by his mother Tamar, was returning to Persia \ 100

<!-- page 5 -->

rch[certifica] ificates apers Or aaner | p.12 and Chapter 1 p.9 of thig Volum | iv orcs certificate No.499 id V0 pers Sei Certificate No.8782 avat’ P f gical stu student's Guide to the Medical Profession Mace: Meng. er wer calculator or retail price inte. svllan & ¢ [Hid ay, Cr 7. purchasing PO w PHCE index £700 ig abe» 1878) p. ysine meas992; The British Medical Journal Vo}. No.1124 (15 1 Woday's money (Mies 17 Middlesex Rifle Volunteer Corps Certificate of Resign July 1882) P.119: RC she! napets: "Gazette 6 Mat 1880 snation NSS: Calendar 1993 priv ' Mili +] Midwifery certificate Ae e papers: examination Books 1884, 1885 Me 6. index ion Books 1882-1885 are missing (2011))[§] . ‘te Le Measure ofthe Elite: A History ofMedical P[ractitioners][ jy][ Harley] rhe! C Medical Journal Vo eeca . (15 May 1886) pp.954.5 oe 1) pritise oma, midwifery and registration certificates: 7 The ‘papers Diplo tes; The British MedicalJournal priva Mat V o].2 + dus 8) 9.971 .. Library The Burgess Papers: Anna Buy ess ; ee (27 Oct 88 , Public SSS, transcript ofIntery; |snew YO husband of Anna’s gt-gt-granddaughter (2017) nlerview in 1890 | ; sotat0 Hendersor<9I ED57 241881 £.90b Census1881 Census ) “Py provided by HANS 4g 11/55 ED SES sa 1881 - Telegraph ad che RAS 18 paily iy College School om |831"eh 19 Univer -T etter to William Cormick from John Cormack : 00 private ant‘oF in Ireland and Australia appears in theie . May 1880 21 John act swo dividends though according to John Cormack the second fiiend byte Ailkenny 2gi was 18 2d in the pound (Dalby Herald & Western QueenslandAdvertiser 22 Dec pi nal one’. The first 7 ould have been about £160. P.3) so William’[s] a apers. Letter to George Cormick from Mary Cassabois 9 Apr 188] 2 ri Georee Cormick’s Birthday Book [bt ‘1afoy J., La Perse, Paris (1887) p.44 aaa“al Register 1887 (<www.ancestry.co.uk> (2017)) 1 private papers , 1 Ptia FO 610/96 Passport Registers 

101