---
generated: 2026-03-21T20:46:09Z
generator: pymupdf4llm
source_file: "media/docs/Old Limerick Journal - Casteleyn Thomas Roche Limerick and Rotterdam 1736-1788 pp34-36.pdf"
page_markers: true
---

<!-- page 1 -->

————eee...nn ———[———$———eee—— — —  — —— Thomas Roche of Limerick and Rotterdam 1736-1788 -; =29) ohn Roche (1688-1760) marr- [SOO appointed in 1761 as his agent in that city pda a ied Anne, youngest daughter by Mary Casteleyn to recover money, goods, wares and meror: é of Philip Stacpole of MountSO chandise owed to him by Mssrs Andrew by « Pa cashel, county Clare. His and Garret Harvey of Waterford, although cemewfeeed death is recorded on the he also dealt in cargoes of Stacpole monument in St Mary's Cathegin, brandy and blue (afeathwhit **e** rs,ner candles,used in theis not preciseidentified. nature of the goods and wares dral, Limerick. There were four sons of washing). Thomas did not necessarily own The timing of Thomas's arrival in this marriage; Stephen and Philip, both of outright all the ships which carried his Rotterdam is interesting. The Seven Years’ whom became wealthy Limerick merchcargoes. Some deeds record him owning War 1756-1763, between the four allies of ants, John who according to his mother’s only part of the ship; obviously different Austria, France, Russia and Sweden against will went to Dublin™ and Thomas whose trading partners were obtained for each Prussia and England, badly affected maritrading records are to be found amongst trip and venture, individual trading parttime trading opportunities but Holland, the Old Notary Archives in the Municipal ners contributing what they could afford. being neutral, allowed for a brisk trade Archives of Rotterdam. For example he owned, or commissioned from Rotterdam to carry on as usual. Even Thomas was born about 1736 in the whole of de Bloem van der Zee (The so, there was constant interference with Limerick and appears to have been the Flower af the Sea) before December 1758, neutral Holland's shipping. Trading had third of the Roche brothers. John Roche, but only three quarters after that date, and its problems and difficulties and Thomas his father, had an extensive trading empire, by 1759 only one quarter of the ship. But Roche's deeds show that shipping was trading with Bruges and Rotterdam, supplyhe also had a share in other ships such as a hazardous enterprise. De Voorzigtigheyd ing the West Indies with beef, butter and de Stad Rotterdam (The City ofRotterdam) (The Caution) totally owned by Thomas hides and importing sugar and rum.™ His in which he had an interest of one sixteenth. Roche, on passage from Bordeaux to mercantile success was built upon by his Thomas did much trade with Limerick Curacao (an island of the Dutch Antilles in sons, notably Stephen and Philip, who opersometimes via Dunkirk, and with Cork, but the Caribbean, off the coast of Venezuela) ated their respective trading empires from also further a field to Norway, as well to was taken by an English privateer called Limerick. John junior was presumably Malaga and the Dutch West Indies. A deed The Terrible in November 1762 and carried looking after the family interests in Dublin. dated 19th April 1762 shows him commissinto Jamaica, where the ship and her cargo It is to be supposed that Thomas was sent ioning Captain Robbert Stedman of the were condemned. The term condemned as to Rotterdam by his father, who already frigate Vriendschap (Friendship) of Rotterused in these documents appears to be a had trading links there, not only to act on dam to sail to the island of Malaga for technical term meaning confiscated. On his own behalf but also as the family agent wine; the return port of arrival was to be this occasion, Henry Holding of London, in that busy international trading port. Vlissingen in Zeeland. Thomas Roche hatl but late of Rotterdam, was appointed by The names of Stephen John Roche, merat least one office clerk or agent in RotterThomas to try to recover his ship and chant of Limerick, Philip Roche, merchant dam by the name of Andrew Meade. In goods. De Zee Numph (The Sea Nymph), of Limerick, John Roche jor, merchant, 1762 Thomas gave power of attorney to sailing from Cork to St Eustatius, (a Dutch as well as that of Thomas, all appear in Andrew Meade to look after the business West Indian island near St Kitts), carrythe indexes to the Old Notary Archives in in Rotterdam during a proposed absence ing a cargo of 180 barrels of beef which Rotterdam. In all there are about 100 deeds on a foreign trip; neither the duration nor belonged to Thomas was seized by an alone relating to Thomas Roche and his location ofthe trip is identified in the deed. English privateer called John McPherson business for the period between 1756-1780. This power of attorney shows the confidof the Britania of Philadelpia and escorted Most of these are in Dutch but some have ence that Thomas had in his clerk which on into Antigua in March 1758. A 1763 beenservicewritten in English, apparentlya special gave Andrew Meade the right to buy and deed, five years after the seizure, shows offered by some of the Rotterdam sell, claim money and goods and make Thomas still struggling to get compennotaries. Nearly all of the evidence shown drafts; in fact, proceed with anything to do sation for his lost ship and cargo; following below about Thomas's trading activities with Thomas's trade. It is interesting that an appeal to the High Court of Admiralty in is from the period 1756 - 1763; obviously Thomas's brother Philip Roche also used a London, his ship and cargo were declared there are many more deeds yet to be conmember of the Meade family as his agent free and the 1758 condemnation of his ship sulted. in London, in this case Augustine Meade and cargo annulled. Whether he ever saw On 2nd December 1756 (when Thomas of the London based firm of Augustine his money is another matter, but this case was 20 years of age) he applied for and was Meade and Co., one of the Irish transdoes illustrate just how difficult maritime granted the Burghership of Rotterdam, atlantic provisioning firms operating from trading was and how persistent Thomas which allowed him to practice a trade or London during the period 1756 - 1775. Was In pursuing unjust seizures and conprofession in that city. Thomas allowed no The Roche family had connections by mardemnations of his ships and goods. De grass to grow beneath his feet, for that riage with the Meade family of Limerick. Sloem van der Zee (The Flower of the Sea), very day he went straight to a local notary The Archives in Rotterdam provide carrying gin and brandy and en route from named Adrian Schadee for a deed to be evidence of those merchants Thomas was Rotterdam to Bergen in Norway, was seized drawn up between himself and Captain dealing with in Ireland. Patrick Weldon, by an English yacht called The Prince Gerrit van Nijn of the ship Mana Burthen. merchant, of Dublin is mentioned in 1759 William about 12th February 1759 and The Maria Burthen could carry 135 tons of as owing him £100 for blue sent from brought to the harbour of Fraserburg in goods and on this first venture carried a Rotterdam to Dublin,a billdrawn on Isidore Scotland. An affidavit of 27th March 1759 cargo of wine to Limerick: once in Limerick Lynch and Co., London, having been refusidentifies Thomas as owner of a quarter it was to pick up a cargo of about 135 tons ed payment; this time Thomas appointed of the cargo in partnership with Richard of beef, butter, tallow and hides for the Alexander Armstrong of Dublin to act as Proctor and others “all of this city return trip to Rotterdam. An examination his agent to recover the money owed. Mr (Rotterdam), merchants and burghers of Thomas's main notary deeds show that James Roche of Waterford, merchant, was and consequently subjects of their High

<!-- page 2 -->

**==> picture [919 x 1238] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
AOT ni cni. io Qh—o—n nda cl ce --Eam cece cc c RX n“’:— ON<br>eeeee<br>Bi. le Ee | LD Ee us panties. al Hea England. Thomas's insurer Theodorus Van<br>Le aera, Ee Fat. pe a rll ie bi se at SZ Se eH roa nade? Eijnden was given the task of recovering<br>eed “Se ily be Bode Blac = | I) i wn tlh - ~ mS ee pe the cargo, but he failed. On 4th November<br>og ieee aes é ga ike Pomorie | 4 a s) Pri ~S ay et | 1758 the British High Court of Admiralty<br>; lee E=3s aoe Te Me i co a f DN ase ie ae then Thomas set about recovering all his<br>Pas ae eae BT ear ihe 44 if i Noe A =n costs from Van Eijnden. It was this con-<br>Easesee Fe2 iesaanfreeads ie Soyly ‘digg —_ a Sg cont*/ le stant interference with neutral shipping<br>dg eee i, sage Sot 7. TINS PN A * by the English that eventually took the<br>Te fap Fa (i we rseea. shoe the English from taking possession of<br>| jpVE ;Me<br>a le, rR Se Ae (PeeAis Sy ae ships sailing under the Dutch flag. Papers<br>on gl eas yf ll > ioe a ae iy fn in the National Archives at Kew, London,<br>ethallh yOm i sf a. Sn at SE, identify similar troubles experienced by<br>ORE. sf yaaaa pL] ng” his brother Philip Roche. One petition in<br>ae’ rt LET i fe o ¥ ——e cone particular dated 1792, when England was<br>Fafiejo 4 y aaOiSaan,eexg stl| een tige at: grey.  ro;.*hel awritewhichEustatius aehad and leerysai St Martin agomin theLimerick pala Dutch Westfor St<br>eG ist Re a , = ODE MAAS & 7 Indies “for greater security under Dutch<br>rear | Buseyf Al colours”. These two ships had been seized<br>a. Le Koree ake: ne EI by the English and the provisions, valued<br>:peas; ies ee ek Ree? Saas 5 ee at £15,000, were to be “divided amongst<br>Map ofand Rotterdamwarehouse.in 1778.The arrowThe circle shows shows the location the locationof the otherofThomas warehouse. Roche's house picoPhilip Roche'sme petitionsirin whichesoehe states<br>Pee ener ee aera ie ee atari that he “never had, nor meant to have any<br>concern with his Majesty's Enemies”.<br>Excellencies the States General of the the deed is a warning by the other cargo With all these vicissitudes one could be<br>United Provinces ... they the said witnesses owners that Roche and Proctor have no excused for thinking that Thomas was not<br>declaring that the said merchandizes ... be right to act independently without consul- doing terribly well but in fact he appears to<br>the sole property of the owners and that no ting the other owners. There are others have become a very rich man. He was ob-<br>} subjects or subjects enemy to the Crown deeds relating to this cargo, appointing viously a very astute merchant, operating<br>of Great Britain hath, have had or have agents in Scotland to act on their behalf well with his Dutch colleagues but not<br>directly or indirectly any partnership share but by August 1759 nothing had been losing his Irish links. In 1764 George Mac-<br>or interest in the said goods” A further recovered, Insurance of cargoes wasan ob- namara, a doctor living in the Hague, gave<br>: deed dated 24th July 1759 states that the vious solution; on 13th June 1758 Thomas his brother-in-law Charles Macnamara, a<br>cargo was taken in March 1759 to Leith in insured goods to the value of 3000 guilders general, power of attorney to look after his<br>storedScotland to be unloaded and was currently which were loaded onto a ship called de business. This deed was witnessedby both<br>in a warehouse there; Thomas Anna Rosina. This ship, en-route from Thomas Roche and Andrew Meade, fellow<br>Roche and Richard Proctor appear to have Limerick to Rotterdam, was seized by an Irishmen and obviously known to the<br>taken matters into their own hands as English privateer and taken to Rye in Macnamaras. The deeds mentioned in this<br>} N A A ML a S T Big oq Septem, Deavay Depremier. il j<br>ind ¥ « Kop, be dep Pieter Vitter, ood Pe 4 faren. *<br>. GETROUWDE ex OVERLEDENEN<br>* Duin, gia Loe wines Joheser,@ a. iE<br>FERSONEN sinwen ve STAD iene Se eee h |.<br>R O T T ER DA M Din ag ie Ben op dite |<br>; Bears Or aeace came soe aan de by, Degrer ues Males Tessas Avoelis Bizbard, Med, Iftoe van Jpen, i<br>t ALS MEDEN EENE ) ‘Thomasaren, Roche,fe Krewwyi, gx | Mera van Waasdyh,ix oi. Herre i<br>& firest, 27 jer, ; ; k<br>¥ s&s ‘TT | cadeWien Tiere ee noe ie |<br>7 &% ied: wan Hla van Geldeven, | t Kind van Gerri HMoagitiearct, i<br>2<br>Por de Maand SEPTEMBER 1728. ee prety me :<br>WAAR BEYGEVOEGD Is: fe 4 pe Ee Oe etthee<br>J i + E Fyn. 't Kind‘vaa Johannes Heyer, aaa de +<br>: M A G A Li Y N | ; Din att ditt. Hala j<br>VAN 4 E+ Rind van Rythar Roomgard, ¢p On 30 dite. ;<br>ae ‘cteen5 : <gedea Erbird. Dyk, 9 weekmn, . : {Eee<br>c elaeaemse<br>|<br>3T APF EREELE WN : : Die 9} as, Wiresiot,”is deKeriiras; 30 j<br>4 SS ———>S==_=== 4 De st ey eee mareA Ree oda tas* a<br>a Scheetz, i<br>= = By NICOLAASKooper, opfe deROTTERDAM,MeentCORNEL,over de LomberticheDrokkerenBrug. Bockver fim:t oerbegraven ret) 16 ores a air7HP |: denKindFogelenaang,vas Hubert18vandagen. Santen, iu ffisapF<br>; r DIACO. :<br>The front page of the List of Names of those married The page showing the entry for Thomas Roche<br>or who died in Rotterdam in September 1788. (Thomas Roche, in Krooswyck, 52 jaren) in the List of<br>Monique Peters of Purmerend, The Netherlands. Names opposite. Monique Peters of Purmerend, The Netherlands.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>

<!-- page 3 -->

## et ———— ——— ——— —————— — — ——— 

short article are but a few relating to the a Protestant church, but at that time in having descended to his heir-at-law, who period under review. Most do show other Holland, Catholics were buried in Proteshad before such descent, duly taken the hazards of maritime trading apart from tant churches. Thomas was buried inside oaths”. The Lord Chancellor then disseizure by English privateers. Loss of ships the church, a privilege reserved for the missed the bill, with costs. and cargoes from storms and tempests are rich; poorer people were buried outside in Clearly other members of the Roche an obvious risk and complaints by Masters the graveyard which then surrounded the family profited from the inheritance of and crew also had to be dealt with and the church. Although Rotterdam was badly Thomas Roche's estate but we may never problems resolved. One such complaint by bombed during the Second World War, know exactly how. In the 1798 Will of the crew of De Voorzigtigheyd in July 1760 the Groote Kirk, now called the Laurens Thomas's other brother, Philip Roche concerns the dangerous and negligent Church, miraculously survived, but there John, there is mention of £700 remitted to behaviour of the then Master Arnoldus is now no sign of a memorial erected to him “as appears in my books and in the Born, during a voyage from Dublin to commemorate Thomas Roche. books of my deceased brother Thomas ot Eustatius via the Canary Islands. The Six months before he died Thomas Roche of Rotterdam, for the purposes of Master (according to testimony), was freRoche had negotiated to purchase an estate paying the same to the creditors of Michael quently drunk, always absent from the in county Kilkenny and was also in the proKelly, deceased; it is a difficult matter to ship whenever she docked, and the ship cess of acquiring another estate in county find them, he (Kelly) having become a so badly provisioned, that water and food Clare, So far I have not firmly identified Bankrupt above thirty years ... 1 desire my had to be rationed. In addition the Master either estate. However it is interesting that executors may ... pay the said sum to the was violent to the crew, attacking two sailhis nephew George Roche, son of Stephen Trustees appointed therein first getting ors (named Pieter Berkhout and Patrick Roche, came into the estate of Granagh, advice of an eminent lawyer how my Mealy) and challenging the rest of the also known as Granny, county Kilkenny, on property is to be exonerated on paying the crew to combat by knife. This sounds like a the death of his elder brother John Roche same, "(10 positive nightmare that the 24 year old in 1825 Granagh, including the ruined Many names of other Irishmen appear Thomas was left to sort out. Castle, is situated on the Kilkenny side of in the index to the deeds in Rotterdam. In 1/77 there is evidence that Thomas the River Suir, just slightly up river from Those noted because of my own interests was living above his warehouse in the Zalmthe port of Waterford. It seems probable are Augustine Meade, the one time Lonhaven or Salmon Harbour of Rotterdam. that this is indeed the property which first don agent of Philip Roche of Limerick. Also An advertisement in the Rotterdamsche came into the possession of the family via listed in the index is the firm of Meade Courant reads:Thomas Roche; he would have certainly and ©'Brien, the Dublin based business been interested in possessing a river frontbelonging to Thomas Meade, a Limerick “On Friday October 24th 1777 at preage property on the Suir, so close to Watermerchant and Denis Thomas O'Brien of cisely 3 o'clock in the afternoon, the ford, to facilitate and extend his trading Dublin. Found too, is George Roche, notfollowing brokers: H van der Pals, empire. However this remains a hypotheary of Limerick, whose deed is dated 1674. G van Alphen, W de Cromme, W.H. sis until it has been possible to examine the Obviously there is still much work to be Carlebur andJ van Alphen Gszoon, will deeds in the Registry of Deeds in Dublin. done in these Dutch records, which resell in the inn called Hef Zwynshoofd The purchase of one estate and the near main a potential fruitful source of Limerick (The Pigs Head), an excellent shipment purchase of another make it doubly puzzmaritime history. of about 900 barrels or firkins, of old ling as to why Thomas left no Will. Limerick butter from the year 1776. The Catholic Relief Act of 1778 (which REFERENCES The butter can be viewed in the wareenabled Catholics who had taken the oath 1. Will of Ann Roche of Limerick, née house below Mr Roche's residence of allegiance to the King, to take leases Stacpole, proved 8th June 1781, menin the Salmon Harbour, and in the of land for up to 999 years),was followed tions her sons Stephen, Philip, Thomas Leuvenhaven (Leuven Harbour) next to by two further measures in 1782 which and John Roche of Dublin (Father Het Witte Hart (The White Deer). allowed Catholics to buy land, except that Clare’s Manuscript Abstracts of Wills, Viewing prior to the sale day, October located in Parliamentary Boroughs. When Irish Genealogical Research Society, 24th 1777, or on the day itself.” Thomas Roche died intestate in Rotterdam London). At in September 1788, his eldest brother 2. Iam grateful to Monique Peters of this distance in time it is difficult to gain Stephen Roche of Limerick became his Purmerend, The Netherlands, for her anandaccuratepersonalityimpressionbut thanksoftohisthecharacterInternet theheir-at-law. heir-at-lawHowever by a Protestanta bill was fileddiscoverer, against a workArchiveson ofmy Rotterdam,behalf in the Municipal it is possible shed some light on his artistic blacksmith named John Lee, who claimed 3. Rodgers, Nini. Ireland, Slavery and interests as his name appears in a list of to be entitled to this estate in as much as Anti-Slavery 1612-1865, Palgrave Macsubscribers for a book of poetry.” Thomas Thomas Roche, the purchaser had never millan 2007. Roche died intestate on the 25th Septemreturned to Ireland and taken the oaths 4. Truxes, Thomas M. London's Irish ber 1788 aged 52 years in Rotterdam, He of allegiance as required. The case was Merchant Community and North must have died very unexpectedly because heard before the Lord Chancellor, John Atlantic Commerce in the Mid-Eightalthough he was a wealthy man he did not Fitzgibbon, who as it happened, was not eenth Century in Irish and Scottish appear to have had time to make a Will. | unfriendly towards the catholic Roches. Mercantile Networks in Europe and have found no evidence as to the cause of The question was “whether a Roman Overseas in the Seventeenth and Eightdeath. Between the end of September 1788 Catholic subject, residing beyond the seas, eenth Centuries. Academic Press 2007. and October 1788, three advertisements purchases an estate in Ireland, and that he 5. The National Archives, Kew, England. appeared in the Retterdamsche Courant, redoes not at some time during his life, CO 246, pages 209-212 inclusive. questing all Rotterdam notaries to search return to [reland, and take the oaths, his 6. Woodhouse, James. Poems on Several through their client papers for a 30 year estate descends to his heir-at-law, or exists Occasions. 1766. (Seen on Google period to see if they could turn up the Will for the benefit of a Protestant informer?” Books 28th December 2008). of the recently-dead Thomas Roche, but no After debating the subject the Lord Chan7. Iam grateful to Sandra Meade Lara such Will was forthcoming. Thomas Roche cellor ruled that as Stephen Roche had Kelly of Carlow and Amsterdam for was buried in the Groote Kirk, Rotterdam taken the required oaths, he had every visiting Rotterdam to verify this. on 26th September 1788 at a cost of 30 right to inherit his brother’s property and 8. The Prerogative Will of John Roche guilders. The burial record states that he that purchasers residing beyond the seas proved in London 18th January 1826. is “bejaarde jongeman” that is an elderly were only required to take the oaths 9. The Celt. Dublin, 1857. (seen on batchelor and of the Krooswijk district of “within six months of their return to this Google Books 16th Octaber 2009). Rotterdam. This was an expensive burial as Kingdom and that the intestate having 10. The Prerogative Will of Philip Roche others listed on the page cost either 3 been prevented from returning by an act of John proved in London 2nd January guilders or 6 guilders. The Groote Kirk is (rod, the estate was not discoverable, it 1798. 

## ee