---
generated: 2026-03-31T09:16:30Z
generator: pymupdf4llm
source_file: "media/docs/james-roche-manual-excerpt.pdf"
page_markers: true
---

<!-- page 1 -->

— : NCeAa ce 115500 | . THE OLD LIMERICK JOURNAL Nenetl 2 FRENCH EDITION 3-L SS“ans ai SS noe i d was) ( alhment | - JAMES ROCHE i study ; also}lewas)mm the! =...empmmemm@ 4goa amesLimerickRoche on 30was December,born in —..,.Cr™~—™:—*RRRR,,—r—esses BYcesJim KEWMYccs ievanenreomuermons rss«isés ;sC;sCOwCON publicdisaster untilhad no theidea astoundingof the newsimpending broke, ||| — lr ss on Thursday: 25 May, 1820, that the bank J ||f oI98 g@ Lee=| son1770, of Stephenand was Rochethe third and sis—car.Csé=SCrsé=COCs«s«s;sSCséCrséCs was to close its doors. ?rench; sa@ueeeces his second wife, Sarah Oe Bankruptcy proceedings were Ernest: O'Byren. His father was a member of the , 5 ee instituted immediately against the Roche 4 well-known Limerick-Cork family, and fo. brothers, who co-operated fully in the | Series; his mother was the daughter of John éLe investigation into the closure. Among the tobert! O'Bryen, of Moyvanine and Clounties; : fe es og “i. assets handed over to the assignees by 4 , County Limerick. po ag a James Roche was his library of more than | shmen. At the age of fifteen, James Roche was Poe es J ~ | 4,000 volumes. He had collected these ,M.H.; sent to France, and continued his studies bo ae Be books over the years with care and good i » at the Catholic college of Saintes in re a ga. ee literary taste, and it was generally F ichard. Angouléme.and made good He wasuse anof intelligenthis two years pupilat Cea ae weeI Leerea oeee believedthan £6,000in Cork on their that purchase. he had spent more '4 1942. | the college. It has been recorded that his ee ee oo, The proposed sale of these books loe, by; pronunciation and the idiomatic preoe caused an unexpected stirring of the ermot! cision with which he used the French oe ad oe creditors’ conscience. This report, tublin,| language were so perfect that he was Rs ee’? published in the Limerick Chronicle, on 5 \ _ returnedHe wenttohomeFranceto Ireland,to furtherbut soonhis BgSl So . ee Qo fellow-citizens:which Roche was held by his Cork | > education and to develop his business — if At a Meeting of the Creditors of Messrs. { .. interests. He entered into a junior ee S. and J. Roche, held in the _ partnership with his elder half-brother, Ty 4s Commissioners of Bankrupts Room in : ' George, who had developed ; an extensive Dr. Joseph Ignace Guillotine. the Commercial Buildings, Cork, on : -{. wine trade with Bordeaux. James Roche Monday last, James Murphy in the : settled in that city, but regularly visited Napoleon. On his release, he returned to Chair, it was among other things : ‘Paris to further his studies and to explore Bordeaux, to find that his own and his resolved:4 the literary and political life of the family's property had been confiscated. That the development of the causes of the > capital. He continued to live in Bordeaux for Messrs. Roches’ fall, and the candour : At Bordeaux, at that time, there was a three years, and made efforts to recover and honour which marked their .|; growing Irish community and Lynches, some of his property, but met with little examination, entitle them to our deepest . Dillons, MacCarthys and O'Sullivans success. He returned to Ireland in 1797, sympathy in their misfortune. And we ; were among the prominent citizens of and spent the next three years in Dublin do, therefore, request the Assignees to ] _ the busy seaport. There was a Rue and London. He settled in Cork in 1800. present Mr. James Roche, in our name, j - §ullivan among its streets, and there With his brother Stephen, he decided with such selections from his Library as . were many other Irish influences to be to enter the banking business, and the may appear to them most acceptable to ; ‘|: found in the city. Roche soon integrated firm of ‘Stephen and James Roche’ was his highly literary mind; and also his © into French life. registered with the Commissioners of the share in the Cork Institution. He was nineteen when the Revolution Treasury on 17 June, 1800. The bank The final examination of the Roche 1 _ began. He showed an early enthusiasm opened at Camden Place, Cork, and soon brothers by the Bankruptcy Commission _ for the republican principles and ideas of prospered. James Roche has recorded ended on 7 November, 1820. In his book i . the new order. He knew Vergniaud and’ that the bank in its early years carried on The Old Private Banks and Bankers of 1 . other Girondist leaders, and he also a very large business, ‘which was Munster, Eoin O'Kelly has described. the - became a friend of Dr. Joseph Ignace prosperous’ and 'made large profits’. He winding-up of the bank's affairs, and | Guillotine, the inventor of the deathwas able to note that ‘in the beginning of quotes Mr. Dennis, the senior commachine that was to bear his name. the year 1814, he considered himself missioner: ; op A native of Bordeaux, Guillotine had, worth between £80,000 and £90,000". The Iam happy at this opportunity of thus | as a young man, taught in the Irish extent of the bank's operations in 1813 declaring what is, Iam sure, the opinion | College there. At that time, ‘he was can be measured from the fact that, in and feeling of my Brother Comm| occupied about heads in a different way June of that year, the bank's money in issioners as well as my own, and in : from that which afterwards obtained his public circulation amounted to approxunison with them, I beg to tender the | attention’, Roche wryly commented imately £295,000. respected Gentlemen now my heartfelt | afterwards. However, the bank's profits were soon sympathy for their loss and sufferings, i During this time, Roche studied the to be diminished. Following the breaking and the warmest approval of the manner i history, literature and politics of France. of Napoleon's power and the collapse of in which they have met the pressure of i On his visits to Paris, he associated with his trade embargo, England was able to adversity, and conducted themselves i some of the leading figures of the import huge quantities of continental under it, equally to the benefit of their | * Revolution and shared their ideals and grain in the autumn of 1813, causing a creditors and their own character and | aspirations. sudden and substantial fall in prices. As honour. : In Paris, in 1793, Roche was arrested a result of this drastic fluctuation in In October, 1826, the assignees were able . . and imprisoned in the Luxembourg, trade, many merchants sustained heavy to close their books. Eoin O'Kelly has : ‘3 under a decree ordering the detention of losses and were unable to meet their written: ; ae British subjects in France. After six financial commitments. After repeated adjournments, ‘in order to months, on the death of Robéspierre, he Roche's Bank was in serious trouble give every facility and opportunity to the secured his release through the influence but, behind the scenes, it continued to outstanding creditors of the estate to of Brune, the future marshal of struggle to remain viable. The Cork come in and proye their debts’, the

<!-- page 2 -->

oe THE OLD LIMERICK JOURNAL BENG FRENCH EDITION | : es a SE, — _ . o Bank,eventuallywhentakenit openedover by theits ProvincialLimerick pridedunder himselfthe signature on hisof erudition,'J-R., of Cork’. and inHga anan I : branch on1November, 1825. review of a new edition of Gibbong suff > & James Roche, who had married Anne Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, we yel| — . - Moylan of Cork and had two daughters, find him rebuking the author for his slips hag ; second time in his life. He went to Three years before his death, hg der sR : nowLondon foundto himself pennilesstake up another forrisky the shodselected English!about forty articles, which h@a eul;Ret : . profession - that of commercial and carefully revised and, in some instances re ; parliamentary agent to Cork, Youghal enlarged, and published them in tw th ar London,and Limerick.whereHehe spentwas sevento continue yearshisin Misellaneousvolumes, entitledEssays bythean CriticalOctogenarian}and fatpat ra yh G 10 d literary interests. He left London in 1829, 100 copies of which were printed at Cork th _, am 4 iil) and lived in Paris until 1832, when he for private circulation amongst hig w returned to Cork, where he took up friends. He presented copies of the twa in The . . as residence in Woburn Place. On the - volumes to the Literary Institution of re invention of Dr. Guillotine. establishment of the National Bank of Limerick, and wrote these words on the} : Ireland in Cork, about three years later, flyleaf of the first volume: in Commissioners met at the Commercial he was appointed as one of its directors, Presented to the Literary Institution of la Buildings, Cork, on 19th October, 1826, a position he was to retain until his Limerick by the author, in respectful It is ‘for the purpose of making a final death. homage to the city, which he has ever valid dividend and closing the estate’.-It was For the next two decades, Roche was held it an honour and a happiness to own{ the r then disclosed that the gross proofs to take a leading part in the literary and as that of his birth, and, to the ample listg and admitted had amounted to £194,238 12s. cultural life of Cork. He was to serve as of whose citizens entitled to endurings Ja 31d. It appeared that nearly £40,000 president of the Cork Library Society and recollection for their devotion to sciencelf in F had been proved against the estate since of the Cork School of Design, viceand literature, he indulges a fond and, hey corr the previous dividend had been paid and, president of the Royal Cork Institution, trusts, not too presumptuous hope, mays Arc after bringing up the creditors who had chairman of the Munster Provincial be associated the name of James Roches that thus come in, a final dividend of 1/- in College, as the first president of the Cork Cork, November 23, 1850. : four the. £ (British), making a total Cuvierian Society, which was founded in But Roche was not held in universal high} Ne distribution of 4/- in the Pound to all October, 1835, and on several other local esteem. Dr. R.R. Madden, in his Critical; uncl creditors, was declared. boards and committees. Miscellaneous Lives of the United Irishmen, ask Thomas and William, two other brothers Roche's memory had stores of London, 1860, has written: : wh of James Roche, had opened a bank at valuable information at its command, The octogenarian author of ‘Critical and: rep Charlotte Quay, Limerick, in 1801. and his talent as a linguist was Miscellaneous Essays’in many passages co Although they also came under similar remarkable. It was therefore natural that in his work panegyrizes Lord Chancellor§ abal pressure, they faired better, and just he should turn his attention to literature, Clare. The Octogenarian had a hankering4 for managed to survive the crisis. The bank and his critical and miscellaneous essays after lords, and especially any with ord was one of the four to survive the on various subjects, appeared in The whom he had ever been fortunate toi. i calamitous year of 1820. It gradually Gentleman's Magazine, The Cork Journal, scrape an acquaintance. He had a great¥ 1854 curtailed its business, and was The Dublin Review and other periodicals, respect moreover for prosperous people;% i | e no rear a aed oe - % ” ae as . y : ae - ay : : ; Ve ae a i a E 4 F e ‘eit a Pe LOG ao : S — : a aS - S , —— SS _. : i cok : taut aa — oF #ROOALBANKMOLIDAY. @ |Bat ) RTS ¢ are : Re ) bf _ So - . a . _ — a a. if PO wa re _/ USL, fp —-2 ih 4& XG sat aea er 2 AfCH¢./-Ie fag = «4.FE ¥ Soe bea ' : oF ; . - a a 4 8.Po : peABy, 7ee COOEOLS we= td MERRICK a ~~.tf a | NS Mens Lote ’ Wa VUE 7 behak Rh Aaa oes | oe ay | Banknote of Roches! Limerick Bank. . oe

<!-- page 3 -->

; nf : | 

| 

**==> picture [570 x 790] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
a” LN: a a Te - - eens ; nf<br>at<br>THE : oO :<br> OLD LIMERICK JOURNAL FRENCH EDITION 63 |<br>i.—————————— eg<br>and hardly ever a good word or a a R e Rt Rinrtngee Se i ee re 7<br>yet in private life he was a good man. He |4p ee ee | i a ;<br>had seen the horrors of the French re ee i Ay MAR<br>Revolution and had a great horror of as ee Nete up 2sMou:<br>democratic principles. The secret of his SN be, Oe. A (ioe<br>eulogies of Clare oozes out of a note in |S Eee F BE Lips cel ce Le cia,<br>referencethe to old Fitzgibbon, the father of TNMs De eeGM<br> Chancellor. The latter, he says, was a 3Ee meLi PoaSV, ae case = CORDAYD - aaei eoas ia<br>particular friend of his (James Roche's) | ES ?We i, eee ee Me- i<br>father; and Roche's grandfather had been hu a a8 Pps Le fo a Rah: i | oe is .<br>the first client who paid Fitzgibbon a fee, |.4¢ a* tom1 ee beLe<br>rendered service to Roche's family and -. 3 - yeoo © ke “oo  @ Set "|<br>instrumental to the saving of some of the eeSY vo Ee ale sas Bos ; , * :+ a rr. 4a . ~~ae i<br>Itvalidityis difficult,of Madden'sat this remove,critical explanationto assess theof [2ie a mMh,INIMESMe,tt)  agaeaey:CP Mt 7oisawotCadaca a: #<br>the relationship between the Fitzgibbon i. sl0/4i wee , ce oe ir<br>and Roche families in Limerick. ~ -, a gl! : CY a,eegone Lo SCO am Pee]<br>in James Roche maintained his interest [33 Wages is Co ee de ee ee SSN i<br> France to the end of his long life. In his ees aeee LEY Ds OO Off es ee : i. _<br>correspondences, preserved in the Cork [2°<br>Archives Seaaie saan PasBe RM ne 7 eee 4 ty ia 8<br>that Institute, many references to <= tHe VENee goes a Poke es S.. |<br>county and its people are to be = UIA ss Ge Fe uae 9 eg tabae a<br>Nemaries,found. One 62 ru lett e r fromde Paris, Anne written(Grasbt o is),her i[ee@egyae j AmeMRMrame) aCW |Cg : aEmme PLBMemenS gape7/0) Yiaaraaoe Ame<br>uncle, James Roche, on 2 March, 1853, icp aya ye ikeaDe?ogAis ee & eaten a Z<br>asks for assistance, and contradicts Po) ja Wei = | a ey RR f<br>whatever her husband may: have |@M:gi<br>reported yn Eg oN i be. fbe| aie? ae | } ae<br>complainsto thathim regardingher husbandher. Shehas i,|(%MAAS.ae 17)WT 007 iFbaoFoS4) aeLosif. esan<br>abandoned her, and that she may be Ce ei Bi RS Yi ay ee \. pod<br>forced to take a post as a governess in Uwe SaemrnMOI Nema gf)<br>order iN am fo<br> to support herself and her children. oe ye AO) Ch eo ewe ? . ay. ane<br>James Roche died in Cork on 1 April, ag)a Pt iy. i"AllsDe 2 ae EN a<br>1853, aged eighty-two. eeree |.aed Le Ot| oeha.eae | Aa S roeae<br>'A souvenir of 1793", the year of the arrest and imprisonment of James Roche: re \<br>SOURCES street scene in Paris. pt<br>Ireland and Irishmen in the French ji:<br>Revolution by Richard Hayes, Ernest Limerick, 1946. Cork Historical and Archaeological |<br>Benn Limited, London, 1932. The Old Private Banks and Bankers of Society, Vol. XIX, 1913. poo<br>Biographical Dictionary of Irishmen in Munster, by Eoin O'Kelly, Cork Critical and Miscellaneous Essays by an<br>France by Richard Hayes, M.H. Gill and University Press, 1959. Octogenarian by James Roche, Vol. I, II,<br>Son Ltd., Dublin, 1949. The Cabinet of Irish Literature, Vol. II, Cork, 1850. | oj<br>Worthies of Thomond, Third Series, edited by Charles A. Read, London. James Roche Correspondences, ‘Cork |<br>collected and edited by Robert Herbert, ‘James Roche, the Roscoe of Cork’ by J.C., Archives Institute, Cork.<br>.<br>AolE Cl tno: Aevs! Cer Cop. leh-a AopypO9tgee Yove Ad are ann Cfoa Cdln Cex Carterrole artis } :<br>me<br>COs ¢ “4 loaia Lh Grey Ce‘  aay“ Of eu Corse and epaaes0 ) ? he 7 Bw<br>(AMO ‘ Wn 2s rede v (ior a<br>\. CEa ELE Cr por Wen, ae 0th o> Lo Eco. sel eed. eleLe a?—oe. ape PREY:i<br>wpe , +A —ww<br>"Presented to the Literary Institution of Limerick ... in respectful homage to the city, which he has ever held it an honour |<br>and a happiness to own as that of his birth ...'<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>