---
generated: 2026-03-21T20:39:06Z
generator: pymupdf4llm
source_file: "media/docs/Catherine Enright 1911.pdf"
page_markers: true
---

<!-- page 1 -->

**==> picture [1644 x 978] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
j —awe —_ = Soaeee = " . = +<br>1 [;]<br>\<br>7 CENSUS OF IRELAND i911.<br>|<br>Two Examples of the mode of filling up this Table are given on the other side,<br>q FORM A. No. on Form B.__ 34+<br>} RETURN of the MEMBERS of this FAMILY and their VISITORS, BOARDERS, SERVANTS, &c., who slept or abode in this House on the night of SUNDAY, the and of APRIL, 1911. | /<br>| RELATION RELIGIOUS AGE (last Birthday) RANK, PROFESSION, OR . If Deaf and Dumb<br>i ;<br>NAME AND SURNAME. a PROFESSION. EDUCATION. and SEX. OCCUPATION. PARTICULARS AS TO MARRIAGE. WHERE BORN IRISH LANGUAGE. Dumb only )<br>; :<br>} a — : ——|— — —- ao — ———— imtemeeie deena i) oestate : = aeaeei me thera ImbecileLunatic.or Idiot<br>. \ Insert Age opposite State for each Married Woman or<br>:<br>No Persons ansent on the Night of Sunday, April | _ ; each poll. ute Ages | State the particular Rank, Profession, entered on this Schedule the Write the word -<br>2nd, to be entered here; EXCEPT those a enu- | State whether | State here the particular Re- of Males in column 6, Trade, or other Employment of each number of :— “Tnisn” in this t<br>| merated elsewhere) who may be oud at Work or “Head of ligion, or Religious Denom- and the Ages of person. Children or young persons a a column opposite the >}<br>e TRAVELLING, cc., during that Night, and who| F amily, vor ination, to which each person . Females in column 7. attending a School, or receiving we : name of each person<br>3 RETURN Home ON MonpDAY, APRIL SRD, ¢ Wife,” belongs. State here whether he regular instruction at home, should Whether Completed | Children bornaliveto] If in Ireland, state | who speaks Iris<br>: Zg Subject to the above_—_—_—_instruction, the Name of the| “ Daughter,**Son, _ [Membersnominations_ of Protestantare requestedDe- orand sheWrite,”can “ Readcan || yearFor Infantsstate theunderage onein [Nobe entryreturnedshouldas Scholars.be made in the case “«“ Married,”Widower,” ‘sheetpal the | If,presentno childrenMarriage.born | City;in whatif elsewhere,County or || “Inisuonly,and& theEnciisn”words || Writetive  theinfirmitiesrespec-<br>thenHead of the Family should be written first; or other not to describe themselves “Read” only, or |’ months, as “ under 1 of wives, daughters, or other female « Widow,” larria ve | tlive, write * None” | state the name of | oppositethe namesof | opposite the name ‘<br>other the names of his W ife, Children, and Relative; by the vague term * Protes- “Cannot Read.” month,” “1 month,” relatives solely engaged in domestic or “Single.” ps ner in column 11. the Country. those who can speak | of the afllicted ‘<br>Relatives; then those of Visitors, ** Visitor,” tant,” but to enter the “2 months.” &c , duties at home.) : ice” both languages. In person. Y<br>Boarders, Servants, &c, “ Boarder,” name of the Particular ; : 2 ie Pe chiger pone a other cases no entry f<br>“Servant,” Church, Denomination, or <cinn sitide ———I Before filling this column you are re 4 Total wis should be made in<br>re ae, Body to which they belong.) Ages Ages quested to read the instructions on year,write Children =" this column. i.<br>Christian ; of of the other side, one.” born living. ;<br>Name. | Surname, Males. Females. alive,<br>“ee cela ats < rei ‘: S SOY At ou cepa i aan” ees Ge, ae : ree - wer we ” RF 14. cf Sey |<br>tj 2 a Te) ei * :<br>j<br>( = .<br>j 1 Awakhotnl Onkea WH LAL 4 f 44 y ‘J 4 Ad ITAA ba a" ws a 41 q ‘7 iAd — | he — | a — - — “Maaitied = ae - | re - doo. dorcthes — <1 ——— | a 8 ait exmeiegunem |<br>/ 7] ‘ p Fe \ , : |<br>Yereon, forar|O'Pkea  _Daughtiv| Reman tratbuta\<br>Mad shsme/ | Hll(/ tht s nc—. CALghGNA La _ Reman fatheadAA ¢tntels ae en[tee ae a | SANDmr — ae Saviherds~ OD ed Oat =|<br>’<br>;<br>Pera} | - eee) y; Y ", {/ 2 fend tnt| . | to"0  |dekolay dinigheY “a e aie” f ie f PF"4 ae4 ofPanesg Qs Sagei i"<br>, j || OOIEwTT; AsyuAAA 4407+ft4 74HOLLhe MPavaaa’?aD 4 ( E7144)BO ALLSPp Sf siffLeads’ GS {Alte bs ilaiteeeeenee j—_—__—L| =i EE l(t — radf LAAAE,ar a | a= = = = | -= on Lat)Y22. « 20752 ‘a | p , 5 = C72 " , i| , ‘soe<br>NUMiao \|hpy tatu,ol boatdut| Romantbtthobe| rads tlnke sR. Pee| Rorbku Makes _| aan_o | Ceres), =a hod. beth,. _ + ere ~ |)<br>t |<br>|Zredemckh’(Me;botler Bonarda |Noncanformt | Fada Ub 1 ie Conant: $ultrn ak UWerka dona. Po on ces ee pe | \<br>.<br>8|\Ptir  |Odase |Bensder|Foman hathelc |frodoeWrt|24<br>9| Patnek. | >O'Hare : ~ — ae| Notf Erofeooer . : Long:4 \ + one ' _ lhe4%,  douth | ea ty ; r:<br>_ |Beardet| Reman trathdts| firadathrte yee| Sve Aed f Erefeoors} _| dine/ fet| oes ol ee i ied fe<br>10 |<br>B: 11<br>Ea<br>| ‘enc<br>12 > IA DURES [SL] > ee ie wl POSTE | NORM or | CE, eet Oo ae . <i ' yi 5 ee, 44<br>Piha aS, ee SS Sr: TERR a: Se ee a ee 2 " x f Sees oS eS Ger eee<br>| 18 Be aD re weEe a "| SS<br>pit<br>rf ee ae eee oS SRE ee 6 I oes Ae en ee tae ha ee aieas<br>| -— |]|] PF |] ere —— — |__| _——__— ————_————_-—— —— —_ f<br>|<br>15 | 4.<br>I hereby certify, as required by the Act 10 Edw. VII., and 1 Geo. V., cap. 11, I believe the foregoing to be a true Return. 4<br>that the foregoing Return is correct, according to the best of my knowledge and<br>| ‘ : ignature of Head of Family.<br>| fchent Bolamdle teanah Signature of Enumerator. a |<br>eee<br>: = Sos — = a a nelervan Slips —ssannllnen——— en rn es Steer res Sas > —a Pe oe yeeros em —- a<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>