---
generated: 2026-03-21T19:47:21Z
generator: pymupdf4llm
source_file: "media/publications/persia-iran/Sir Denis Wright_Burials and Memorials of the British in Persia.pdf"
---

**Journal of the British Institute of Persian Studies** 

## **Iran** 

**ISSN: 0578-6967 (Print) 2396-9202 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rirn20** 

## **Burials and Memorials of the British in Persia** 

## **Denis Wright (Former President)** 

**To cite this article:** Denis Wright (Former President) (1998) Burials and Memorials of the British in Persia, Iran, 36:1, 165-173 

**To link to this article:** https://doi.org/10.1080/05786967.1998.11834588 

Published online: 23 Mar 2017. 

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 8 

View related articles 

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rirn20 

By Denis Wright Former President of the British Institute of Persian Studies 

## BURIALS AND MEMORIALS OF THE BRITISH IN PERSIA 

Memorials and graves of the British in churches about burials and memorials of those British who and cemeteries in many parts of Persia are a_ died in Persia. My information is far from from complete reminder of Britain’s historical links and manifold and some of the graves and memorials I mention interests there—commercial, political, strategic, may no longer exist. For lack of information I say evangelical—over the past three and a half cennothing about the Roman Catholic cemetery in turies. During much of that time disease was rife and Tehran where British were also buried, possibly also medical care inadequate so that many died tragically _in other Catholic Catholic cemeteries elsewhere. young, among them babies and infants whose sad story is epitomised in the three Murdoch Smith headstones in the churchyard of Tehran’s Armenian ISFAHAN church of SS. Thadeus and Bartholomew. Until late in the nineteenth century, the British Isfahan became the capital of Safavid Persia in and others of Christian faith who died in Persiawere, 1598. In 1617 the East India Co. (E.I.C.) opened a when possible, buried in one or other of the ceme“factory” there. When in 1786 Tehran became the teries of the ancient Armenian communities settled Qajar capital, Isfahan was for much of the ninein Qazvin, Isfahan, Bushire, Shiraz, Tehran and teenth century an important staging post for travTabriz. By the 1880s, faced with a growing Christian ellers from Britain and India on the road from community in Tehran, the American Protestant Bushire to Tehran and Tabriz. Some of them died Mission there took the lead in searching for a sepathere, as did members of the Indo-European rate burial ground for these expatriates and in 1884, Telegraph Department and C.M.S. families stain conjunction with the Armenian Evangelical tioned in Isfahan. Church, bought from Mirza ‘Ali Khan, Amin alThe earliest known British graves in Persia are in Dawla, 6,000 zars ofland at Akbarabad, then ahamlet the Armenian cemetery of New Julfa, the Armenian about two miles south-west of Tehran. Subsequent suburb established by Shah Abbas at the beginning purchases in 1888 and 1904 of adjacent land providof the seventeenth century. During the nineteenth ed Tehran’s Protestant community with some 13,000 century, a number of British were also buried within sq. m. for their cemetery. Some years later small the precincts of the Armenian All Saviours’ Christian cemeteries under the care of the Church Cathedral. In the twentieth century, the C.M.S. Missionary Society (C.M.S.) of London were estabestablished a small Protestant cemetery on the lished in Isfahan, Kerman, Shiraz and Yazd while Tehran road outside the town. American missionaries established one at Hamadan. Among the earliest recorded British deaths in Persia are those of Sir Robert Sherley and Sir The NewJulfa cemetery” (Pl. XVII) Dodmore Cotton who, after visiting Shah ‘Abbas at . . Ashraf on the Caspian, died within a few days ofeach onset a acarestthose of» their headstones other in July 1627 in Qazvin. According to their erme , , fellow traveller, Sir Thomas Herbert, Sir Robert was William Bell, d. 24.2.1624, aged 33. E.I.C. factor in buried “under the threshold of his door without Isfahan. He came to Persia in 1616 with the sailing much noise or other ceremony”, while Sir Dodmore, _ vessel James carrying the E.I.C.’s first trial shipment ambassador of Charles I, was buriedin the Armenian _ of goods, and was the first ashore atJask where they cemetery where Armenian priests and people “very anchored. According to E.I.C. records, Bell died civilly assisted the Ceremony...his Coffin was “after a seven nights sore visitation with a burning covered with a crimson Satten-quilt lined with fever” and his funeral was attended by “Hollanders purple Taffata; upon his Coffin were laid his Bible, and such Franks as were resident, but likewise with Sword and Hat”.! No memorials survive. Cogiah Nazer and other the principal of the Below, beginning with Isfahan, I give such inforArmenians, with all their churchmen .. . and at least mation as I have gleaned froma variety of sources 5000 Julfalines and other Xpians”. 

about burials and memorials of those British who died in Persia. My information is far from from complete and some of the graves and memorials I mention may no longer exist. For lack of information I say nothing about the Roman Catholic cemetery in Tehran where British were also buried, possibly also _in other Catholic Catholic cemeteries elsewhere. 

165 

166 

JOURNAL OF PERSIAN STUDIES 

Dr. the Rev. Edward Paget, d. 21.1.1703, aged 50 on _— respectable merchants of that nation and the serhis way home from India. Matriculated Trinity vants of the mission”. The headstone is inscribed College, Cambridge 1671-2; Fellow 1679; Fellow of “Political Agent in the Persian Gulph”.’ the Royal Society 1682; mathematics master, Christ’s : Hospital 1682-95; chaplain to Sir William Norris’ Stuart Cumming McDonald, d. 1868, aged 1 year. mission to the Great Moghul Aurangzeb George A. Malcolm, d. 15.7.1826, aged 21 at 1699-1702.4 Yezdikhast en route for Tehran with the Kinneir Macdonald mission. Bombay Civil Service. Nephew In his monograph, in Armenian, The Armenian _ of Sir John Malcolm.® Cemetery of New Julfa, Mr. L. G. Minassian lists 149 European graves including those of Bell and Paget; JohnA. Orford, d. 9.1.1869, aged 19 months. some 20 others could also be British: where there isa Claudius James Rich, d. 5.10.1821, aged 34, of surname some have been identified with the help of _ cholera in Shiraz en route for Bombay. Reinterred in Bishop Hassan Dehqani-Tafti: Isfahan in 1826 at the instance of “his affectionate Ct les L. Arter, d. 1919, aged 62. Ziegler. & Co. friendism in ColonelShiraz. J.RichMacdonaldwas theKinneir”E.I.C.’s afterResidentvandal-in Eric, Herbert and Kathleen Baggaley, d. 1888, 1888 Baghdad.° and 1892, in infancy. Charles Darnley Stuart, d. 14.7.1826, aged 21 at Rev. James L. Garland, 1872-1933. Church Mission Yezdizhast en route for Tehran with the Kinneir to the Jews. Macdonald mission.!° 

E. P. H. Glover, 1842-98. Armenian origin. Major Arthur Stock, d. 5.8.1831, en route for Tabriz. Dr. Leslie Griffiths, 1899-1942. Australian doctor 15th Madras Native Infantry. of the C.M.S. Murdered in tribal territory while Dr. John Taylor, d. 6.12.1821 at Shiraz. Bombay travelling with his son and H.M. Vice-Consul Medical Establishment. Re-interred in Isfahan in Isfahan. 1826 following vandalism in Shiraz cemetery.!! Ian Griffiths, 1930-42. Son of the above, murdered Frederick William Waddell, d. October 1871, aged 9 with his father. months. Emily Kathleen Hope, d. 1931. Wife of British and . . 7 ; : ‘ Malcolm, Rich, Stuart and Taylor were given a Foreign Bible Society representative? joint burial service on 17 July 1826: “there were in Hilda Nightingale, 1897-1943. C.M.S. nurse. attendance at the solemn ceremony one califa or All . 5 archbishop, twelve bishops, and forty priests, besides Saviours Cathedral boys bearing candles etc. for all ofwhich, of course, a Eveline Gordon Bruce, d. 1873, aged 16 months. very handsome present was given, and also a donaDaughter of C.M.S. missionaries. tion to the church”.!* . . It is also recorded that Thomas Adkins, coachman Mrederick Knox° Hi »d. 29.4.1917, aged 28. H.M. to Sir Gore Ouseley, died in Isfahan on 31 July 1811 en route for Tehran, but where buried -is not John Stanley Hughes, d. 11.2.1871, aged 28. Indoknown.!4 European Telegraph Department. Dr. Catharine Mary Ironside, d. 1921 of pneumonia, C.M.S. Protestant Cemetery aged 49. C.M.S. doctor. Buried in the Armenian Bahram William Dehqani-Tafti (British mother), d Cathedral “as a gesture of respect and affection of ¢ & 1999 dered Fa Irani uti an the Armenian community” among whom she qopran ; ved 2AS, Bikhop Dehua u Taft. m worked (Pl. XVIII).6 ehran, aged 24. Son of Bishop Dehqani. Dr. Andrew Jukes, d. 10.11.1821 of cholera, aged 43. Rev. H. C. (David) Gurney, d. 27.2.74. Australian. E.I.C. doctor at Bushire. 1804. He was travelling. to C.MLS. Missionary. Tehran from India on a political mission when he Mr. Harrison. C.M.S. Missionary. diedling, inread Isfahan.the AnglicanJ.B. Fraser,Serv w **i** ceth whomover his hegr w **a** sve travel-after yg Isaac. C.M.S. Missionary.«oct the Armenian Service. The funeral procession was Clifford Harris, d. 1926 of typhus. A young school led by the Armenian archbishop and clergy “in their _ teacher at the Stuart Memorial College, Isfahan; his rich robes of ceremony” followed by “all the grave since obliterated by road building. 

BURIALS AND MEMORIALS OF THE BRITISH IN PERSIA 

167 

BANDAR ABBAS Anthony Parsons, who visited the church ten years later, listed only the following headstones and From 1722-63 Bandar Abbas was the E.I.C.’s base |memorials:!6 in the Persian Gulf. J. G. Lorimer, in his encyclo“ . . ” paedic Gazeteer of the Persian Gulf names eighteen John Arnott. “Late Chief Engineer employees of the E..C. who died there between M. J. Bird of Sunderland, d. 14.10.1890 at Borazjan 1739-61 with the comment, “probably many others”, “in the service of the Persian Mining Corporation”. 1760 was a particularly bad year when, along with a agatehew Coates of Belfast, d. 9.8.1871, aged 35, at AlexanderMr. Nash, Hamilton,“most of thewritingEuropeanin 1727,soldiersthoughtdied”.that sea ofPoplexy:apoplexy. Commander ofS.75.S. MulaMale. the unhealthy climate was not the only cause of Newcombe J. C. Edwards, d. 10.11.1893, aged 42. death as “the Europeans often hasten Death sooner Intemperancethan he couldand Debaucherycome by his of severalown accordkinds; andby CyrEngineer,8 , British India Steam Navigation8 Co.‘ they have a Burial-place pretty near the Town, well Victoria Goolzad, d. 4.3.1916, aged 77. oeeen gomps: Dut never a Christian Church in Charles Arthur Grant, d. 24.9.1877, aged 7 months. : Son of Major Charles Grant “officiating Political Resident”. QISHM ISLAND Joseph Gregory, d. 17.5.1894. Qishm Island, close off-shore from Bandar Abbas, Varkom Gregory, d. 22.7.1894, aged 43. was occupied without Persian consent by British and Caroline Hayward, d. 19.10.1905, aged 64. “Widow Indian soldiers in 1820 to serve as an anti-piracy base —_ of Dr. William Hayward”. but was abandoned three years later because of the bad climate and high mortality. WhenJ. B. Fraser visA. M. J. Lucas, d. 12.6.1906, aged 58. ited the island in 1821, “of the whole force there Ripsima Lucas, d. 13.8.1898, aged 44. Wife of the were but 300 Sepoys and a few Europeans fit for above. duty; and not one British officer able to attend 44 John MacLeod, d. 11.9.1823, aged 29. East India parade, except the Commandant himself... noCos Resident thing can be imagined more desolate and unpromis: : ing than the island”. Nevertheless, until 1935 the Mesail S. Malcolm, d. 17.7.1877, aged 32. British retained at Basidu on the north-western tip of Sarah Malcolm, d. 29.11.1902. the island a naval supply depot and coaling station. In 1968 the remains of the abandoned British Elizabeth Malcolm, born Bushire, d. 27.2.1909, aged cemetery at Basidu of about thirty gravesand memo-__75. “relict of Arratoon Malcolm”.!7 rial obelisk were visible. Seth Simon Nahapiet, d. 21.5.1878, aged 8 months. BUSHIRE MaryLt. Col. FrancesW. F. Prideaux,Prideaux, Politicald. 1.8.1877,Resident. aged 33. Wife of . : . George F. Simpson of Charmouth, Dorset, Bushire was the E.I.C.’s Persian Gulf head“ on quarters from 1778-1857 and, thereafter until 1946, owe aged 40, “on board SS Kilna at the seat of the British Resident for the Persian Gulf, .- a proconsular figure appointed by the Government Lt. W. B. Warren and M. C. Utterson “of the XXth. of British India. Regiment Bombay N.I.. Died of wounds received at There are three cemeteries in and close to the storming of Fort of Bushire 9.12.1856”. Bushire where British were buried. Reshire (Rayshahr) Cemetery The Armenian Church of St. George This British cemetery on the west side of the A British visitor in 1966 reported seeing anumber _Bushire peninsula was abandoned after the removal of British graves dating from 1856 in the church’s in 1963 to Tehran of the remains of those killed in graveyard and three wall tablets within the church World Wars I and IL. A visitor in 1966 found some commemorating British officers who lost their lives thirty to forty graves, many unidentifiable, dating in the 1856-57 Anglo-Persian war; however, Sir from 1815. Another visitor in 1976 noted the 

168 

## JOURNAL OF PERSIAN STUDIES 

remains of a mutilated large marble plaque listing and died, aged forty-nine, on 16 December 1835 of names and regiments of soldiers killed in World _ fever in Shiraz en route for India.!9 War I. Most of the fatal casualties (less than 50?) suffered by Anglo-Indian forces during the six-months AngloTEHRAN Persian war of 1856-7 were buried in this cemetery; among them, those killed at the storming of Reshire There are four cemeteries in which over the years fort on 9 December 1856 (Brigadier Stopford, 64th British have been buried, the earliest being the Regt.; Col. Malet, Bombay Cavalry; Lts. Warren and Armenian church of SS. Thadeus and Bartholomew Utterson, 20th Bombay Native Infantry); also Lt. south of the bazaar, close to the original British misFrankland of the 2nd European Light Infantry and _ sion house in the district still known, I believe, as the eighteen others killed at the battle of Khosh-ab on Bagh-e Elchi (“Ambassador’s Garden”). The others 8 February 1857. General Stalker and Commodore are the Protestant cemeteries of Akbarabad and Ethersey, the army and naval commanders, who mys‘Azimabad, and the Commonwealth War Graves teriously committed suicide within days of each Cemetery in the British Embassy compound at other in March 1857, were also buried here.!® Gulhak. SHIRAZ The Church ofSS. Thadeus and Bartholomew Headstones and tablets for the following were Like Isfahan, Shiraz was an important staging post noted by me in 1970 and are believed to be still in on the way to Tehran from Bushire. In the 1860s it situ: became an Indo-European Telegraph Department Charles Alisomn, d. 29.4.1872 of pleuro-pneumonia. On 13 June 1811 Lady Ouseley gave birth here to BM. Minister » Tehran 1860-72 (PI. XXa). The Times the daughter who was to die a few months later in P Tehran, the first recorded birth and death of a His funeral took place at 2 o’clock on Thursday afternoon, British child in Persia. Thomas Sheridan of the ‘the 2nd. inst. with most unusual honours. All the Persian E.1LC.’s Bombay Civil Establishment, a member of Ministers of State, except the Sadr’azam, all the generals Harford Jones’ 1808 mission and subsequently an 24 Principal officers of the army, the Governor of the E.LC. factor in Persia, died in Shiraz on 6 September Jewish conmmenities wee men 8 4 € fi enian an 1812, : rar : . panied on foot from the Mary being buried in the Armenian church of St. British Legation to the Armenian Church. All the foreign ing thethere.burial But within a long-standingthe town of regulation anyone dying prohibit- withandrepresentativesresidents, withand a theirlarge staffs,concourseall theof European people attendedofficials out, prevented the burial of Claudius Rich in the _ the funeral. Everybody was in full uniform and the street same church. He died on 5 October 1821 and was _ was lined by troops the whole way, on each side. The miliburied in the then well-known Bagh-e Jehan-Nama tary band, the Shah’s horses richly caparisoned, and also (“Garden with a View of the World”) on the hillside _ those of the Sadr’azam, formed partof the cortége. On the overlooking Shiraz where he had camped. Other next day the Sadr’azam, accompanied by the Minister of British and fellow-Christians were subsequently War, went to the British Legation to pay a visit ofconburied in this garden, among them: dolence, and called also upon Mrs. Hill (Mr. Alison’s sister). Sergeant Collins, Indo-European Telegraph inspector, murdered on the Shiraz-Kazerun road. Anna Burgess, d. 8.1.1892, aged 77. Armenian-born Captain bers. widow of Edward Burgess (buried in Tabriz). Dr. John Taylor, d. 5.12.1822. Bombay Medical Jobe Burgess, d. 1855, aged 18 months. Son of the Establishment.Henry Valentine. Walton, d. 1871. Indo-European HarrietBaker,et Baker,MedicalBaker, **d** .. **5** .6..6.1878Superintendent, agedd **49** .. **W** ofifeifetheofof Dr.Dr.Indo-J.J. EE. Telegraph. European Telegraph Dept.?? Also, several children of Telegraph families. Catherine Baker, d. 22.2.1884, aged 76. Widow of Tablets in memory of Sergeant Collins and Captain J. R. Baker R.N. and mother of the above Dr Captain David Ruddell were placed in the Armenian J. E. Baker. church. Ruddell, of the Bengal European Regiment, Major-General Sir Henry Lindesay Bethune, Bart. was attached to Henry Ellis’s 1835 Persian mission “General Ameer-i-Toop Khana” (headstone inscrip- 

BURIALS AND MEMORIALS OF THE BRITISH IN PERSIA 

169 

tion), d. 19.2.1851, aged 64 (Pl. XIXc). AccomIn 1930an English visitor found “outside the walls panied John Malcolm on his 1810 mission; member [of Tehran], the so-called Protestant cemetery .. . it of British military mission, Tabriz. Retired to _ really is the burying place for any foreigner who may Scotland but returned to Persia in 1850 for health die in Tehran, and is very well kept. It looks more reasons.*4 like a pretty garden inside high walls.34 Dr. James D. Campbell, d. 23.3.1818, aged 31. teryAccordingcontainedtoatBritishits closureconsularin records,1970 508 thegravesceme-of Assistant1810 mission.22surgeon, E.L.C. Accompanied Malcolm’s which 117 (possiblybh anotherther 2020) were CGGerman, 102 (possibly another 22) were British, 49 American and Rev. Dr. William Glen, d. 12.1.1849, aged 71 18 Swiss.*> Among the British were: ingtor(Pl. hisofXIXa). the son,Persian aScottish memberBible.Missionary of DiedH.M. Legation.”®inSociety Tehranand whiletransla- visit. Ehizaaughter: Shireen: of Sir Ouscley, G. and d- LadyApri.Ouseley. 1812, aged 9First months.buried in the garden of the British mission house south of the Eleanor Katherine (Nellie) Murdoch Smith, _ bazaar, then in 1882 re-interred in the “old chapel”, d. 30.11.1883. Wife of Robert Murdoch Smith, direcin 1890 moved to Akbarabad and in 1979, damaged, tor in Tehran of the IndoEuropean Telegraph _ to British Embassy, Tehran.3® Department.Her headstoneDaughteralso recordsof the theabove deathMrs. in 1881C. Baker.of an walh f T. Bamford, d. 8.81808 at Gulhak , aged - infant daughter, Jeanie, aged 6 months.2” ne of more than twentytive Leegrapn stat an families buried in this cemetery. Gertrude Bell, in Hugh, Alan and Andrew Murdoch Smith, d. respecTehran during the 1892 cholera epidemic, wrote of tively 21.11.1876, aged 4; 4.1.1877, aged 5 months; many European deaths, among them “Telegraph 31 (sic).11.1869, aged 1 day (Pl. XXb). Children of clerks who had been playing cricket the day the above.?8 before.3” Hubert, Archie and Nellie Murdoch Smith, d. 19,20, |Henry Cadogan, d. 22.8.1893 in the Lar Valley, aged 21 March 1884 aged 7, 5 years and 4 months respec34, Diplomat, British Legation, Tehran. Engaged to tively, at Kashan of diphtheria while en route for Gertrude Bell.*® Scotland (PI. XXe).” Lily Hepburn of Wakefield, Yorkshire, d. 23.9.1963, Charles Scott, d. 28.10.1841, of dysentery, aged 36 aged 85. Mother of Olive Suratgar, wife of Lotfali (Pl. XIXb). Second son of Sir Walter Scott. Member Suratgar, Professor of English, Tehran University. of British Legation.” Charles Cradock Hartopp, Bart, d. 14.3.1930, aged Rosina Regina Stevens, d. 5.5.1856, aged 20 months. 36. Diplomat, British Legation, Tehran. Daughter of R. W. Stevens, H.M. Consul, Tehran. Dr. Thomas F. Odling, d. 17.2.1906 of typhoid, aged . . . 55. Telegraph Dept. and British Legation doctor, ScottThe arememorial inside the church,tablets of the othersAlison, Campbell in the church-and and daughter, d. 11.9.1898 aged 10 months. 39 yard. Two others known to have died in Tehran and = _-4,_ possibly buried in this cemetery are Artillery ‘Azimabad Protestant Cemetery (Pls. XXI-~XXIIa) Sergeant Spears, died November 18115! and a Mr. By the 1960s, Akbarabad was no longer an isolated Hollingworth, manservant of Sir G. Ouseley, died village beyond the city walls but a suburb of Tehran 1 November 1812.52 surrounded by houses, some of whose inhabitants A visitor in 1974 noted two memorials, presumobjected to Christian burials on their doorstep. In ably of British subjects (Talmage Nelson, consequence, the municipal authorities urged the d. 13.3.1877, aged 3 months, and Dr. David Khan, Protestant Cemetery Committee to seek a new site. d. 1905, of typhus, aged 57, Army doctor) in St Desultory search and negotiation were brought to a George’s Church (Armenian) in south Tehran.*° head in 1967 when the municipality at first refused to allow the burial of a Swiss national in the cemetery. Akbarabad Protestant Cemetery Thanks(‘Abbas toHoveyda)the goodwillandofMayor both theandPrimehis Ministerassistant As already mentioned, this cemetery was acquired (Messrs. Nikpay and Pirouz) a satisfactory agreement in 1880-4. It was managed by a committee of was eventually reached whereby in return for the surMinisters/Ambassadors, usually under the chairrender of the Akbarabad site and an undertaking to manship of the British representative, sometimes leave existing graves there undisturbed for thirty that of Germany or the USA. years, the Tehran Municipality provided the 

170 

JOURNAL OF PERSIAN STUDIES 

Protestant community with a new walled site of some also USSR (11), Poland (10), France, Netherlands 14,976 sq. m., equipped with water and electricity, at | and Norway one each. ‘Azimabad on the Qum road about ten miles from the A memorial in the cemetery commemorates by centre of Tehran. The cemetery was consecrated on name 3,595 soldiers of the Commonwealth armies 1 July 1970 by clergy representing the Episcopalian, who died in operations in Iran during the 1914-18 Presbyterian and Lutheran churches of Tehran. Two — war: 3,391 from undivided India, 202 from the UK stone plaques, one on either side of the gateway, one and 2 from New Zealand, among them over 600 vicin English the other in Persian read as follows: tims in South Persia alone of the 1918 influenza epidemic (Pl. XXIIb).4* 

## TEHRAN PROTESTANT CEMETERY 

THIS CEMETERY, PROVIDED AND TABRIZ EQUIPPED BY THE MUNICIPALITY Tabriz, capital of Azerbaijan province, was in OF TEHRAN TO REPLACE THE the early nineteenth century the seat of ‘Abbas OLD AKBARABAD PROTESTANT Mirza, the Crown Prince and Governor-General of CEMETERY, WAS CONSECRATED the province. He commanded the Shah’s armed ON THE FIRST OF JULY 1970 forces, and in 1810 was given charge of foreign affairs by Fath ‘Ali Shah. Tabriz thus became a THE AMBASSADORS OF AUSTRALIA, second capital where the British and Russian CANADA, DENMARK, FEDERAL envoys spent much of their time. It was also the GERMANY, THE NETHERLANDS, headquarters of successive successive British military missions NORWAY, SWEDEN, SWITZERLAND, between 1810-39. There are two Armenian THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA churches in Tabriz where British burials and UNDER = THE CHAIRMANSHIP memorials have been recorded: OF THE BRITISH AMBASSADOR SIR DENIS WRIGHT NEGOTIATED THE TRANSFER AND ESTABLISHED St. Mary’s Church** THIS CEMETERY Sergeant George Dickson, 26th Regiment. The cemetery is today managed by the _ Isabella Nisbet, d. 3.9.1834, aged one year. Daughter Evangelische Gemeinde Deutscher Sprache in Iran of Alexander Nisbet, store keeper of the British (German Protestant Church community) under the ‘Military Mission and his English wife.*4 supervision of a committee of ambassadors whose chairmanshipTo the ond ofrotates 1997annually. 16 British were among the 72 The Chdin eel le a (the name of[a] burials recorded at ‘Azimabad. The cemetery also contains a number of headstones transferred from Edward Burgess, d. 18.6.1855, aged 45. Merchant Akbarabad.*” and Nasir-ed-Din Shah’s principal _ translator. Married an Armenian lady from Tabriz.*® 

TABRIZ Tabriz, capital of Azerbaijan province, was in the early nineteenth century the seat of ‘Abbas Mirza, the Crown Prince and Governor-General of the province. He commanded the Shah’s armed forces, and in 1810 was given charge of foreign affairs by Fath ‘Ali Shah. Tabriz thus became a second capital where the British and Russian envoys spent much of their time. It was also the headquarters of successive successive British military missions between 1810-39. There are two Armenian churches in Tabriz where British burials and memorials have been recorded: 

Isaac Greenfield, d. 25.12.1885, aged 65. Presumably COMMONWEALTH WAR GRAVES COMMISSION the father of Katty Greenfield whose abduction and CEMETERY marriagesation.*” to a Kurdish chieftain in 1891 caused a senThis British cemetery is situated in the south-west eas corner of the British Embassy’s Gulhak compound. Mr. Christian Following the exhumation and transfer from ceme-__ Dr. John Cormick, d. October 1833 at Nishapur on teries in different parts of Iran of the dead of two his way to join the Crown Prince. E.I.C. Doctor. World Wars,*! a dedication service was held on Accompanied John Malcolm on his 1810 mission. 10 November 1963 in the presence of the British, | Married an Armenian and settled in Tabriz.*® American, Netherlands and Pakistan ambassadors, Dr. William Cormick, d. 30.12.1877 in Shepherd's and. representatives. of the Canadian, French and Bush,ush, LondLondon, aged57.S. Son off thethe above,ab MarriedMarrie Indian embassies. The cemetery contains 573 identified graves, of an Armenian lady,Ys sister of Edward Burgess’8 wife.*?: which 552 are those of Commonwealth forces (UK Regina Stevens, d. 20.10.1856 of cholera, aged 24. 467, Undivided India 76, Australia 3, New Zealand 2, | Armenian-born wife of R. W. Stevens, British Consul Canada, Southern Rhodesia and Burma one each); in Tabriz 1847-54, Tehran 1854-60. 

BURIALS AND MEMORIALS OF THE BRITISH IN PERSIA 

171 

Nine other Cormick graves are in this cemetery, Etchmiadzin. Bells tolled and a procession of 150 including the brother of William, d. 1856 of clergy and choir boys, all decked in their finest garcholera.°® ments, conducted the takht-e ravan to the cathedral where the coffin was placed on a table within Sir John Kinneir Macdonald, H.M. Minister in and covered with a gold-embroidered cloth. Next Persia 1826-30, died in Tabriz after a long illinesson morning after prayers in the cathedral “which 11 June 1830. Major Isaac Hart, popular head of the _ lasted about two hours” the coffin was taken to the British military mission, died of cholera that same grave close to the west door, exclusive burial night in Tabriz and was buried in the Armenian ground of Armenian pontiffs. There in the cemetery there with full military honours but no _ presence of Prince Bebutoff, the Armenian burial memorial survives.5! Macdonald by his own wish was _ service was followed by the Anglican service read buried in the precincts of the Armenian cathedral of | by Captain Macdonald. In due time, the Court of Etchmiadzin (Uch Killisa) ten days’ march away in Directors of the Honourable Company erected Russian territory. over the grave a marble headstone “in testimony of John Campbell (later Sir John) who took charge their estimation of important services ably and on Macdonald’s death requested all British subjects successfully performed under circumstances of in Tabriz to wear mourning for two months while —_ unusual difficulty”.>? ‘Abbas Mirza, the Crown Prince, ordered the bazaars Two English ladies, among the very first to reside to remain closed for three days, public marriages in Tabriz, died there, though no memorials survive. and festivities postponed and his Court to dress in The first was Mary Dudley of Soho, London, who grey. On 16th June an impressive procession died of cholera in 1830. She had married in London escorted Macdonald’s coffin on the first four miles in 1819 ‘Ali Muhammed, gunsmith, one of the first of its long journey into Armenia. Servants, mounted Persian students in England.*+ The other, Mrs. and on foot, led horses draped in black, muffled Bonham, was the wife of Edward Bonham, merchant drums, four pieces of artillery and a captain’s guard _ and first British consul in Tabriz. She died of typhus preceded the coffin borne on a takht-e ravan or litter on 30 December 1844. Daughter of Sir William between two mules, while four British sergeants and Floyd, Bart., and reputedly a niece of Sir Robert two “public servants” acted as pall-bearers; behind Peel. came the chief mourners, comprising Campbell and Edward Burgess, in a letter to his mother from his staff, the Russian ambassador and his staff, and Tabriz, describes her funeral: high-ranking Persians, followed by more artillery 4 grave was prepared inside the Armenian church... the and 450 men of the Crown Prince’s Bodyguard. A cold was intense and the streets in many places blocked up salute of forty-nine guns was fired, marking with ice and snow. At near midnight on Monday the procesMacdonald’s age. sion moved out of the house in the following order. First Captain Macdonald, a nephew of the deceased, _went the Armenian priests in their gold and silver brocade twoniedBritish sergeants and two servants accomparobes, with largewax tapers, lanterns etc. chanting the serthe takht-e ravan on its difficult ten-day trek to vice of their church. Then rame a number of people with Etchmiadzin.unknown, has’ leftOnea detailedof the descriptionsergeants, ofnamethis My ‘°FrchesM. ond’Ozeroff’slong po'es Cossacksand inlanterns, uniform,thenthenthe M.body d’Ozeroffcarne . 52 He tells of thunderstorms and drench(Russian Consul-General) and I; next Mr. Bonham supjoumey € . ported by the doctor and other Europeans, his friends; ing rain, of being poled in a flat-bottom boat across then a long line of Christians of various denominations the fast-flowing Aras river marking the frontier such as Russians, Georgians, Greeks and Armenians who between Persian and Russian territory, of passing notwithstanding the inclemency of the weather came uninsnow-tipped Ararat “where Noah’s ark is still said to _vited to show their respect to Mrs. Bonham... when the be on the top”. At Nakhichevan, the party were cer- _ coffin was lowered into the grave I read the service accordemonially welcomed by the Russian governor with __ ing to the rites of our church.® a contingent of m2fantry and Cossacks and by Five members of the British military mission staArmenian clergy, “chanting hymns and carrying tioned in Tabri kn. have died whil fla nd oth bols of the church”. oned in Tabriz are known to have died while on BS esses oar ee as One active service with Persian forces: Three days later, on the outskirts of Yerevan, the , British party donned full dress and placed Captain Charles Christie. Killed at the battle of Macdonald’s decorations on his coffin before Aslanduz against the Russians, 31 October 1812.56 being received by the Russian governor, Prince Sergeant William Hayward, died of wounds near Bebutoff, with a military guard and some sixty Nishapur, 4 December 1832, while campaigning Armenian clergy. Next day, 25 June, Russian solagainst the Turcomans.57 diers, mounted and on foot, escorted them into 

172 JOURNAL OF PERSIAN STUDIES Major Stone, Artillery Officer. Died at Ardebil formerly Anglican bishop in Isfahan; Bishops Koriun 1812.58 Khojababian of New Julfa and Artak Manookian of Also two unnamed sergeants killed at the battle of Tenvan within phe diocese of the Armenians in wan Sultanabad against the Russians, 13 February 1812.59 2n@ India; Ur. €vyon S inassian, archivist oF the New William 5 ary Julfa Cathedral; Dr. Vrezh Nersessian, Curator of 1812 Hollingsworth, manservant, died October Eastern Christian manuscripts in the British Library; ling withof “anhis inveteratemaster, JamesbiliousMorier, disorder”to Tehran while travel-from Embassy,Harootune Tehran;Catchikian, Kevin Reed,formerlyof Hamilton,of the Victoria,British Azerbaijan. Buried in the village of Ahmadabad in Australia; Dr. Edmund Herzig, of Manchester Gilan.® University; Peter Bursey, Jeffrey James and Nicholas Browne of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office; OTHER Mrs. Guli Francis-Dehqani; Pastor Alexander von CEMETERIES WITH BRITISH GRAVES Ottingen and Mrs. Margret Tamp, of Tehran; the staffs of the Bodleian Library, Oxford, Trinity Abadan College, Cambridge, Library, the British Library’s Oriental and India Office collections, the National This cemetery is maintained by the National Army Museum, the Society of Genealogists, the Iranian Oil Co. and includes British reinterred in Commonwealth War Graves Commission, and final1969 froma British cemetery in Ahwaz. ly, Dr. John Curtis of the British Museum, who encouraged me to undertake what I had suggested Kerman he himself might do. Before being abandoned many years ago, this 1 T. Herbert, Some Years Travels into Divers Parts ofAfrica and Asia small cemetery held eight British graves, among the Great (London, 1677), pp. 212-14. them those of three C.M.S. missionaries. Mary Bird, ? L. G. Minassian, The Armenian Cemetery of New Julfa (Isfahan, d. 15.8.1914 of typhoid, aged 58,61 Rev. Henry 1985); T. W. Haig, “Graves of Europeans in the Armenian Carless, d. 1898.62 and Dr. Dobson. Also the graves Cemetery of Isfahan”, JRAS (1919), pp. 321-52; J. Carswell, of ae ? am . §' New Julfa. The Armenian Churches and Other Buildings (Oxford, J. H. Davies, d. 1929 British consul Kerman and 1968), p. 13. Edward F. Malony, d. 20.2.1926.%3 3 F.C. Danvers and W. M. Foster, Letters received by the East India Co. (E.L.C.) from its Servants in the East, vol. V (1617), 100; Kharg Island F.J.Calendar Goldsmid, of StateTelegraph Papers. andColonial,TravelEast (London, Indies (1622-4),1874), p. 562,p. 268;for .. . A Latin epitaph. British consular report of 1970 mentions an —+ Goldsmid, op. cit; H. Das, The Norris Embassy to Aurangzeb abandoned British military cemetery of 36 unidenti(Calcutta, 1959), pp. 36, 77; M. Hunter, The Royal Society and its °fiablehelisk”gravesves,and bly“whatthea Ppear.s °eto Anhave pee disbeen an 3 FellowsH. Kurdian, (Oxford,“English1994). Graves in Persia’, JRAS (1939), pp. troops1856-8.who» P occupieduma y the gravesisland inoO 1839-42§'o-Indianand 6 262-3;Beirut,R. E. WaterfieldVL. (1974)G. Minassian, **,** pp. 188-9.ChristiansininHaigazianPersia (London,Armenological1973), p.Review,165. 7 J o5) oe i erative of aJourney into Khorasan, etc. (London, Mashhad 8 J. E. Alexander,» PP. Travels from India to England, etc: (London, The . ; 1827) pp. 145, 150. only known British grave is that of Mrs. — ® Fraser, op. cit., p. 99; Alexander, op. cit., pp. 133, 150; C. J. Rich, Temple, the wife of H.M. Consul General Lt. Col. H. Narrative of a Residence in Koordistan (London, 1836), vol. IL, M. Temple, who died in 1899 and was buried in the pp. 239-40; Carswell, op. cit., p. 30. nds of the C late-C. 1,64 10 Alexander, op. cit, pp. 145, 150. grounds onsulate-General. 'l Ibid., pp. 133, 150; East India Company Register and Directory (Calcutta, 1823). Yazd a: 13'2 Alexander,Sir Gore Ouseley,op. cit., p.MSS.151. Diaries 1810-15, Bodleian Library, Kate Mothersole, d. September 1907 CMS. '4 p-Lorimer,150. Gazeteer missionary. part 1, pp. 123-4;of the PersianA. Hamilton,Gulf,A New etc. Accoun(Calcu **t** ta,of the1915), East vol.IndiesI, ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 6: Fraser,(London,op.1727),cit, pp. vol.29-34; I, p. 95.D. Wright,; 1ahe English amongst the 16 Persians (London, 1977), pp. 65-6; British Consular Report 1970. me,I am very grateful to the many who have helped 17 ThePapers Malcolmsin author’s (originallypossession. Malkomian) were an Armenian famtion. Amongdirectly or themindirectly,are Bishopin my Hassan questDehqani-Tafti, for informaAnthonyily of BushireParsons’longlistassociated with were probably,thelikeE.I.C.the Malcolms,Others onnatu-Sir 

173 

## BURIALS AND MEMORIALS OF THE BRITISH IN PERSIA 

- ralised British subjects or Protected Persons. See Wright, The Persians amongst the British (London, 1985), pp. 145-6. 

- 18 G.H. Hunt, Outram and Havelock’s Persian Campaign (London, 1858), pp. 192, 220, 222, 243-5; B. English, John Company’s Last War (London, 1971), pp. 88, 124, G. D. Barker, Letters from Persia and India 1857-9 (London, 1915), pp. 17, 19, 24, 31; Papers in in author’s possession. 

         - Information from the Commonwealth War Graves Commission. 

      - ** Tehran consular report 1970; P. M. Sykes, A History of Persia (London, 1921), vol. II, p. 515;. 

      - 4 Kurdian, op. cit., pp. 262-3. 

- Persia and India 1857-9 (London, 1915), pp. 17, 19, 24, 31; 44 Wright, op. cit., p. 115n. Papers in in author’s possession. 45 E. B. Eastwick, Journal of a Diplomate’s Three Years’ Residence in 

- Sw. Ouseley, Travels in various countries of the East (London, Persia (London, 1864), vol. I, p. 193. 1819), vol. HI, p. 205; Rich, op. cit., vol. Il, p. 239; C. J. Wills, Jn 46 Schwartz, op. cit., pp. 123-5. the Land of the Lion and Sun (London, 1891) pp. 293, 295; 47 J. B. Feuvrier, Trois ans a la courde Perse (Paris, 1896), pp. 245, Goldsmid, op. cit., p. 643; Alexander, op. cit., p. 133; S.M.T. 261; seen by the author in 1968. Mostafavi, The Land ofPars, tr. N. Sharp (Chippenham, 1978), 48 PRO, FO/60/134; G. Fowler, Three Years in Persia (London, 

      - 48 PRO, FO/60/134; G. Fowler, Three Years in Persia (London, 1841), vol. I, p. 330. 

   - p. 48. 

- 20° The Times, 8.6.1872. 

   - 49 Medical Times and Gazette (5 January 1878); Plarr, Lives of the Fellows of the Royal College ofSurgeons (London, 1930). 

   - 50 Seen by the author in July 1968. °' British Library, India Office Records (10), L/PS/9/91 Campbell’s despatch of 21.6.1830; Fowler, op. cit., vol. 1, p. 327. 

- 21 B. Schwartz (ed.), Letters from Persia written by Charles and Edward Burgess (New York, 1942) pp. 123-4. 

- 22 W.K. Dickson, The Life ofMajor-General Sir Robert Murdoch Smith °' British Library, India Office Records (10), L/PS/9/91 (London, 1901), p. 251. Campbell’s despatch of 21.6.1830; Fowler, op. cit., vol. 1, 

- 23° Ibid., p. 288. p. 327. 24 Public Record Office (PRO): FO60/158; R. B. M. Binning, 5 MSS. with Mrs. N. Moss, Melbourne, Australia. A Journal of Two Years’ Travel in Persia, etc. (London, 1857), 53. 10,L/PS/9/91; Memoir of Sir John McNaill (London, 1910), vol. I, p. 217. p. 131; H. F. B. Lynch, Armenia (London, 1901), vol. I, p. 266. 

- 25 “The Russian Frontier”, J/RCAS XVIII (April 1961); Wright, The The headstone, seen by the author in 1986 is now set in a English Amongst the Persians, pp. 54-5. nearby wall. 

- 26 J. Bassett, The Land of the Imams (London, 1887), p. 114; 54 PRO; FO/60/15 for her marriage certificate; Fowler, op. cit., 27 Waterfield, op. ct., pp. 99-100. vol. II, pp. 61-2; R. Mignan, A Winter’s Journey through Russia, Dickson, op. cit., pp. 254, 294. etc. (London, 1839), vol. I, p. 141. 

- 28 Ihid., p. 288. 55 M. Wagner, Travels in Persia, etc. (London, 1856), vol. II, 3029 Wright,Ibid., pp.op.294-5.cit., p. 91. pp.1845),93, vol.109;II,J.p.Wolff,234; Narrative ofSchwartz, op.a Mc **i** t.,ssionpp. to71-3. Bokhara (London, 31 W. Ouseley, op. cit., vol. III, p. 125. 56 H. Pottinger, Travels in Beloochistan and Sinde (London, 1816), 32 G Ouseley, op. cit., p. 150. p. 245; G. Drouville, Voyage in Perse fait en 1812 et 1815 (Paris, 33° Article byJane Crane, in TehranJournal, 10.6.1974. 1825), p. 29n. “4 C. E. Alexander. A Modern Wayfarer in Persia (London, 1931), 57 PRO, FO/248/67. p- 63. 58 HD. Willcock, Notes on the Willcock Family (London, 1902), 

- %5 The Society of Genealogists has a copy of the British Consular p. 76. list of burials. Asia Monumental Inscriptions, vol. 1, ASi/M12. 59 J. Morier, A SecondJourney through Persia, etc. (London, 1818), 

- 36 G. Ouseley, op. cit, p. 109; British Library, Aberdeen p. 186; PRO, FO/60/6. MSS./43209; C. Stuart, Journal of a Residence in Northern Persia 60 Morier, op. cit., p. 257. (London, 1854), p. 171; Alexander, op. cit., p. 63. 61 C.C. Rice, Mary Bird in Persia (London, 1916), pp. 4, 183. 

- 37 The Earlier Letters ofGertrude Bell (London, 1937), p. 336. 62 Sykes, Ten Thousand Miles in Persia (London, 1902), p. 192; 38 Jbid., pp. 267, 341. information from Bishop H. Dehqani-Tafti. 3940 British MedicalJournal (7 April 1906), pp. 837-8. 63 From photographs taken in April 1997. Information provided by Pastor Dr. A. von Ottingen, Tehran. _®_ British Consular report 1970. 

- 41 Transferred from cemeteries in Tehran, Masjid-e-Sulaiman, Hamadan, Qazvin, Naibund, Reshire, Rasht, Shiraz. 

- © Information from Mrs. G. Francis-Dehqani. 

**==> picture [444 x 325] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Be<br>4 _ -<br>- - = —, re £ . is= SPs —- .<br>see TINH eh 9 ra a Oy agg arse,<br>. . } > é ” ah fe 2x ~ tie ee Par AY wat<br>a” 6a - —_>OeA eea eS Peeet—mmhe— Oyqe elAi Jslament fie a<br>pr ae £ ne _— a Saag tle m. , a<br>i ae SS Ss ee a Oyen<br>we nl a yee oe ore ¥ FF oan a ad a aan<br>-<br>: a ous - ¥<br>‘<3-+ - a esi Pe ‘clita . ws<br>at KE ee Cage<br>a? hae em a Ff we %. ss « Sara ~!<br>:<br>, ae FE oe estoEe +,OSai: eeeig ee Sy ; Ea.)fs co a ” ee " 4 _ “3 “<br>ps9 i TELUS: 2,bepl BAGS 2 +t Aa are RO: Cees Gos<br>Sih Ee EO ERIN EEE Sih aieee ee tj IDVETS bey Te:<br>‘<br>7 Pa he 5 nS ae ao te Lape wee h<> : aks He ; sa apt py<br>es . . a LPBTt a mt 4 f Kh » ‘ =" p ° ™ 3 -<br>; 4 a . oeFix ak hy. :<br>a. g St ure “ “ef y.-~ak "ies Son, .<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Pl. XVI. NewJulfa, Isfahan. The Armenian Cemetery. Photograph: J. Carsweil’s New Julfa (Oxford, 1968). By permission of the University of Oxford Press. 

**==> picture [173 x 22] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
:<br>= ==) 6. Sees SSS 3 See 3<br>fase oe eS==<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Pl. XVIII. All Saviour’s Cathedral, NewJulfa. Grave ofDr. Catharine Ironside. Photographs courtesy ofMrs. G. Francis-Dehqani. 

**==> picture [437 x 506] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
oe IN MEMORY ae a :<br>Wed i OF 2 eae SHARLES C OO” ‘ie<br>ae Rev’ D'GLER Luk<br>Co ee [Ppteinic Minjesty siege<br>SOs © DIED 42 lar 249, . i] PR Se ee ee .<br>me OhAY RAALTERSOORG<br>| a Fax ae at<br>(a) (6)<br>Wes SACKED tothe MEMORD -<br>Swen eee<br>Hors Pemmuaey vest.<br>is -— pile am as_reHinte,<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


(¢) 

Pl. XIX. Church of SS. Thadeus and Bartholomew, Tehran: (a) Rev. Dr. Glen (b) Charles Scott (c) Lindesay Bethune. Photographs courtesy of Roger Wood (a), Desmond Harney (b-c). 

**==> picture [465 x 595] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
} Sacred to the Memory zB:<br>q CHARLES ALISON eso:.C.B. - H<br>HER BRITANNIC” HA y's ENVOY EXTRAORDINARY AND &<br>‘2 zi gueor PERSIA. pel Re isPe<br>' ‘ DIED ar p99 APRIL 1872. ‘4 ae<br>Pl. XXa. Charles Alison.<br>@ ALAN. ace ee Vi [aateric] [ee]  ea<br>a5 685 5 4 HO DIEDTDIPYT HERI,<br>J: cies fea * ' ) ay ; SND a eof. || ie<br>: ie HIS WAF 2 aoe ae 4 ie ees see i.<br>iy age: a ene By OL)TE eS a ’ ry<br>»<br>sir ce fey < ee mn theiry jay tn BRP ESR fo, :<br>The Sie he 4075 Se rae ‘ae le 4 aq TARE We A p i me<br>Lordsay shepher ae Cpe ‘cay<br>Pl. XXb. Hugh, Alan and Andrew Murdoch Smith. Pl. XXc. Hubert, Archie and Nellie Murdoch Smith.<br>Pl. XX. Church of SS. Thadeus and Bartholomew.<br>Photographs courtesy ofDesmond Harney.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**==> picture [464 x 639] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Tec eo<br>P< TANSCEMETERY, RIVED AND EDU PED E TNee ee a<br>THE MUNIE! coke ead tta GAG CI biSC pes<br>} cINETERY, WAS CORISECRATED ONTHE eB Elet. Myo lenges,<br>ee eee<br>:oei Whgebablates gee Sefeds Lb bl:<br>iy 4 SYEDEN,SWITZERLAMG.THE UNE] ED See geStyMiecdioense<br>e ye AoNs VANCEDhaaOreese- vyoeee ReteeB PTae ~ISE®hs at laters Cal{04ifWO 1GaN tAfant nySotSan Foalbe<br> OMEORATCD OTHE SRANSEER AND WeeAit PR oeen Ba<br>2 SET ARISUES THES GEMETERY = Tala se fel Rega ike ber<br>(a) Pl. XXI,(a) Entrance‘Azimabad gateCemetery, plaqueeryinTehran. EnglishPhotographs(b) Entrancegrap. courtesy gate plaqueyy of Kavehin Persian.Moussavi. (b)<br>(c) W. T. Bamford ofIndo-European Telegraph Dept. transferred from the old Akbarabad Cemetery.<br>Py z ee e e | 4<br>\ ~<br>%<br>pee Se me pee.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


(9 

**==> picture [424 x 614] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
¥ 7 rt<br>‘<br>ser<br>"Sres OT . Eee ee greySS eni. 4 _——- _—<br>" ‘ : . Soy a a. Pen<br>:<br>we F ees a es eee wa a " "Se u SN on tBu: r<br>Pl. XXIIa. General view of“Azimabad Cemetery, Tehran. Photograph courtesy ofKaveh Moussavi.<br>‘ a r z 5 . 7 a, Pe L} 4<br>theae" ; ; ‘“3 *—" D'iau of ; vad — - *<br>‘al - t i ae ge : . . & =<br>eS Ate ee ‘ Some o - : se * .<br>er *t-= er ON ee eke PTE... eee eee : 5 es ra<br>= oT ae Seay ies BREA te = s i +7 ee. Fo = ba foes<br>_* o> * ares a . - *§ ee | aalet - fF 40 ~ +<br>7 rs rt P 4 Mee a] = 5 -*<br>ss! Sate? i > j we .<br>ont Sa J ee | eS et ee be 3° ee te : -_<br>X ee ad the, rrbe } a =a = ys ie ta cA<br>oa |-4= | ors ee | imal = < + nee oS * .<br>* ee a idee * Ye: 23 ee a<br>a Ar eS Se ee ’ a, Ty a = Be<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


PI. XXIIb. British Embassy, Gulhak, Tehran. Commonwealth War Graves Commission Cemetery. Photograph courtesy of Commonwealth War Graves Commission. 

