---
generated: 2026-03-21T20:24:10Z
generator: pymupdf4llm
source_file: "media/collections/burgess-persian-letters/Merged Sections/NYPL Bulletin Burgess Persian Letters Schwartz - 01 Charles portrait and article opening.pdf"
page_markers: true
---

<!-- page 1 -->

**==> picture [281 x 424] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
a4<br>: 44<br>. %<br>es<br>i<br>. \<br>»<br>a!<br>. : “<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


CHARLES CHARLES BURGESS BURGESS From From a a portrait portrait painted painted in in Persia Persia 

! Googl

<!-- page 2 -->

| | 

## THE THE BURGESS BURGESS PERSIAN PERSIAN LETTERS LETTERS Edited Edited by by BENJAMIN BENJAMIN SCHWARTZ SCHWARTZ 

\ MONG MONG the the papers, papers, letters, letters, etc.,* etc.,* presented presented to to the the Library Library by by Mrs. Mrs. Thomas Thomas A £\. Foljambe[Foljambe] Burgess Burgess of of Scarsdale, Scarsdale, New New York, York, are are two two series series of of letters letters from from the the Near Near East, East, written written during during the the years years 1827-1855, 1827-1855, by by the the brothers brothers Charles Charles and and Edward Edward Burgess, Burgess, sons sons of of the the English English banker, banker, economist, economist, and and editor, editor, Henry Henry Burgess. Burgess. These These letters letters afford afford as as connected connected a a history history of of the the adventures adventures and and forfor tunes tunes of of Occideritals Occidentals in in the the Orient Orient as as any any “narrative "narrative of of travel travel and and description” description" that that has has been been published, published, while while the the pen pen of of the the trained trained novelist novelist could could make make of of the the story story as as rich rich and and warm warm and and fascinating fascinating a a novel novel as as has has been been written written on on such such a a theme. theme. But But aside aside from from their their interest interest as as human human documents documents and and their their possible possible inspiration inspiration for for the the novelist, novelist, the the letters, letters, written written during during that that period period when when Turkey Turkey became became the the “sick "sick man man of of Europe,” Europe," when when Russia Russia was was whittling whittling Persia Persia down down to to her her present present boundaries, boundaries, when when England England was was establishing establishing and and consolidating consolidating her her whole whole position position in in India India and and Asia Asia Minor, Minor, acquire acquire added added value value by by affording affording unun expected glimpses into the play and counter-play of the Great Powers, the initi ation ation and and prosecution prosecution of of policies policies which, which, at at this this very very moment, moment, are are coloring coloring events events inexpected glimpses in Egypt, Egypt, the the western western into Mediterranean, Mediterranean, the play and counter-play of the and and the the Middle Middle East. East. Great Powers, the initiFrom From 1826 1826 to to 1828 1828 the the closing closing acts acts of the of the drama drama of of Greek Greek independence independence from from Turkey Turkey were were being being played played to to their their stirring stirring conclusion. conclusion. The The famous famous English English diplomat, diplomat, Stratford Stratford Canning, Canning, was was minister minister to to the the Porte; Porte; those those perennial perennial foes, foes, England, England, Russia, Russia, and and France, France, were were banded banded together together in in a a crusade crusade to to free free the the Christian Christian Greeks; Greeks; an an allied allied squadron squadron had had “blundered” "blundered" into into Navarino Navarino bay bay in in 1827 1827 and and destroyed destroyed the the Turkish Turkish fleet. fleet. In In Persia Persia the the grandiose grandiose schemes schemes of of the the crown crown prince, prince, Abbas Abbas Mirza, Mirza, to to recover recover territories territories lost lost to to Russia Russia was was ending ending in in the the utter utter rout rout of of the Persians, the Persians, the the capture capture of of Tabriz Tabriz by by the the Russians, Russians, and and the the humilihumili ating ating Treaty Treaty of of Turkomanchai, Turkomanchai, concluded concluded just just in in time time to to enable enable the the Czar Czar to to declare declare formal formal war war on on Turkey. Turkey. The The British British Minister Minister to to the the Shah, Shah, Sir Sir John John Macdonald, Macdonald, was was striving striving mightily mightily to to throw throw up up any any sort sort of of bulwark bulwark against against a a Russian Russian threat threat to to India, India, and and British British money, money, munitions, munitions, and and drill drill sergeants sergeants for for the the Persian Persian army army (and (and the[the] concomitant[concomitant] of of British British manufactured manufactured products) products) were were beginning beginning to[to] trickle trickle into into the[the] country country in in ever-increasing ever-increasing volume. volume. Against Against this this background, background, Charles Charles Henry Henry Burgess, Burgess, eldest eldest son son of of Henry Henry and and Frances Frances (Ridsdale) (Ridsdale) Burgess, Burgess, went went out out to to Persia Persia at at the the instance instance of of a a Persian Persian merchant, merchant, Sadik Sadik Bey Bey (later (later ennobled ennobled by by the the Shah Shah as as Syeed Syeed Khan) Khan) in in 1827, 1827, at at * * See See a a note, note, “Gift "Gift of of Anglo-Persian Anglo-Persian papers,” papers," by by Miss Miss Mabel Mabel C. C. Weaks Weaks in in the the Bulletin, Bulletin, v. v. 43, 43, p. p. 484, 484, June, June, 1939; 1939; without without her her careful careful and and painstaking painstaking arranging arranging and and cataloguing cataloguing of of the the gift gift by by Mrs. Mrs. Burgess, Burgess, this this edition edition of of the the Persian Persian letters letters would would have have been been impossible. impossible. 

[351] [3S1] 

## Google

<!-- page 3 -->

## 352 352 THE THE NEW NEW YORK YORK PUBLIC PUBLIC LIBRARY LIBRARY 

the the age age of of eighteen, eighteen, to to join join the the British British military military mission mission under under Major Major Hart, Hart, as as a a Lieutenant Lieutenant of of infantry infantry with with the the forces forces of of H. II. R. R. H. H. Prince Prince Abbas Abbas Mirza. Mirza. Charles Charles does does not not appear appear in in the the British British Army Army List, List, but but his his letters, letters, notes, notes, and and sketches sketches indicate indicate education education and and training training in in military military tactics. tactics. During During his his brief brief career career as as a a soldier soldier he he distinguished distinguished himself himself by by winning winning the the Persian Persian order order of of the the Rising Rising Sun Sun and and Lion,[Lion,] second second class,[class,] for for gallantry gallantry in in action, action, and and comported comported himself himself in in such such fashion fashion as as to to win win the the approbation approbation and and confidence confidence not not only only of of his his military military colleagues, colleagues, but but also also of of those those highly highly placed placed in[in] the the Persian Persian government. government. As As a a result result of of connections connections thus thus established, established, in in 1829, 1829, when when Persian Persian finances finances became became so so muddled muddled that that most most of of the the British British military military mission mission had had to to be be released, released, Charles Charles found found himself himself set set up up as as a a merchant, merchant, financed financed by by his his father, father, and working and working through through Sadik Sadik Bey, Bey, and and the the firm firm of of Hanson, Hanson, of of London London and and Constantinople. Constantinople. Brilliant Brilliant and and bold bold in in his his conceptions, conceptions, he he was was successful successful beyond beyond expectations expectations at at the the outset, outset, and and was was probably probably the the first first Englishman Englishman to to ship ship goods goods from from the the mother mother country country through through the[the] Black[Black] Sea[Sea] directly directly to to Trebizond Trebizond in in Turkey, Turkey, thence thence by by relarela tively tively easy easy caravan caravan stages stages to to the the markets markets of of Persia, Persia, instead instead of of the the previous previous prohibitively prohibitively expensive expensive route route via via the the port port of of Bushire Bushire in in the the Persian Persian Gulf. Gulf. He He traveled traveled back back and and forth forth between between Persia Persia and and England England constantly constantly during during the the years years 1830-1836, 1830-1836, executing executing private private and and public public commissions, commissions, and and on on at at least least one one ococ casion, casion, acted acted as as King’s King's Messenger Messenger for for the the British British Foreign Foreign Office. Office. His His restless restless imagination imagination running running riot riot at at the the enormous enormous possibilities possibilities opened opened up up before before him, him, he he kept kept pyramiding pyramiding venture venture on on venture venture until until finally, finally, in in 1836, 1836, the the bubble bubble burst. burst. Thereafter, Thereafter, a a combination combination of of circumstances circumstances such such as as ill-health, ill-health, “trouble "trouble in in the the Balkans,” Balkans," inability inability to to satisfy satisfy the the clamorings clamorings of of creditors, creditors, and and perhaps, perhaps, interest interest in in newer newer and and greener greener pastures pastures served served to to prevent prevent his his return return to to Persia. Persia. He He died died at at Aix-la-Chapelle Aix-la-Chapelle during during the the winter winter of of 1854-1855. 1854—1855. In In the the meantime, meantime, his his younger younger brother brother Edward, Edward, whom whom he he had had brought brought out out with with him him in in 1830 1830 and and associated associated in in the the business, business, was was left left in in Persia, Persia, practically practically a a hostage hostage in in the the hands hands of of Charles’s Charles's Persian Persian creditors, creditors, who who thus thus vainly vainly hoped hoped to to compel compel the the older older brother’s brother's return. return. At At first first Edward’s Edward's position position was was extremely extremely precarious, precarious, for for apart apart from from the[the] risk[risk] to[to] his[his] person person he[he] led led a[a] hand-to-mouth hand-to-mouth existence existence which which was was in in sharp sharp contrast contrast to to his his previous previous estate estate as as "a “a prosperous prosperous and and thriving thriving merchant.” merchant." But But his his singularly singularly winning winning disposition disposition (his (his widow[widow] could[could][still] still say,[say,] twenty-five twenty-five years years after after his[his] death,[death,] that[that] ‘the["he] was[was] the[the] most[most] all-loved[all-loved] person” person" she she had had ever ever known) known) enabled enabled him him to to retain retain former former friends friends and and make make new new ones ones among among both[both] Europeans Europeans and and natives, natives, even even those those who who had had suffered suffered from from the the unun happy happy outcome outcome of of Charles’s Charles's speculations. speculations. Prince Prince Bahman Bahman Mirza Mirza secured secured his his appointment appointment as as civil civil governor governor of of two two small small villages, villages, an an appointment appointment which, which, because because the the villages villages were were in in the the neighborhood neighborhood of of a a community community of of Nestorian Nestorian 

## Google

<!-- page 4 -->

THE THE BURGESS BURGESS PERSIAN PERSIAN LETTERS LETTERS 353 353 Christians, Christians, led led to to Edward’s Edward's acting acting as as financial financial agent agent for for the the American American Mission Mission at at Tabriz Tabriz and and Urumia. Urumia. He He tutored tutored the the Prince’s Prince's children children and and had had charge charge of of the the royal royal stables. stables. He He did did odd odd jobs jobs of of translating translating into into Turkish Turkish and and Persian, Persian, both both languages languages of of which which he he had had acquired acquired a a fluent fluent knowledge. knowledge. Thus, Thus, while while continuing continuing to to be be held held officially officially responsible responsible with with his his brother, brother, and and confined confined to to the the general general neighborhood neighborhood of of the the town town of of Tabriz,[Tabriz,] he he managed managed to to spend spend his his days days not not too too unun pleasantly. pleasantly. His His letters letters abound abound in in the the names names and and events events which which have have brought brought Asia Asia Minor Minor into into the the western western limelight; limelight; many many of of his his references references are are of of prime prime historical historical importance importance not not only only in in regard regard to to the the matter matter discussed, discussed, but but also also the the actors actors involved, involved, with with most most of of whom whom he he had had personal personal acquaintance. acquaintance. Thus, Thus, revealreveal ing ing bits bits of of information information are[are] afforded[afforded] us us by by the the retailing retailing of of incidents incidents concerning concerning such such great great names names as as Rawlinson Rawlinson and and Layard, Layard, the the fathers fathers of of Assyriology, Assyriology, or or of of the the inner inner workings workings of the of the British British and and Russian Russian embassies. embassies. 

In In 1848 1848 Edward’s Edward's link link with with the the royal royal house house was was greatly greatly strengthened strengthened by by the the accession accession to the to the throne throne of of Nasir Nasir i i Din, Din, nephew nephew of of the the now now exiled exiled Bahman Bahman Mirza. Mirza. Edward Edward sold sold everything everything he he could could lay lay his his hands hands on on and and joined joined the the triumphal triumphal march march from from Tabriz Tabriz to to Teheran, Teheran, where where he he was was immediately immediately appointed appointed chief chief interpreter interpreter and and later later made made editor editor of of the the state state gazette. gazette. His His most most pressing personal pressing personal concerns concerns were were now now relieved, relieved, for for although although still still technically technically a a debtor, debtor, the the change change in in government government and and the the lapse lapse of of time time had had so so altered altered his his status status that that he he was was pracprac tically tically free free to to do do as[as] he[he] pleased. pleased. By By this[this] time,[time,] however,[however,] the the East East had had entered entered into into his his soul soul and and the the thought thought of of returning returning to to a a mercantile mercantile existence existence in in England England was was so so repugnant repugnant that that he he cemented cemented his his ties ties in in Persia Persia by by refusing refusing the the offer offer of of a a position position in in America America (secured (secured for[for] him[him] by by his his younger younger brother brother George), George), and and finally, finally, in in 1852, 1852, by by his his marriage marriage to to a a beautiful beautiful Armenian Armenian girl. girl. And And so, so, although although most most of of his his career career had had been been shadowed shadowed by by the the meteoric meteoric rise rise and and fall fall of of his his brother brother Charles, Charles, and and although although that that shadow shadow was was only only dispelled dispelled at at the the very very end end of of his his life, life, Persia Persia came came to to mean mean the the summum summum bonum bonum of of his his existence. existence. One One small small cloud cloud remained; remained ; for for a a long long time time he he was was unable unable to to secure secure leave leave to to return return to to England England for for a a visit. visit. Ironically, Ironically, when when he he finally finally did did wring wring official official permission permission from from the the government government to to leave leave the the country country for for that that visit, visit, he he died died en en route, route, still still in in Persia. Persia. 

## THE THE LETTERS LETTERS* * 

[CHARLES [CHARLES BuRGESS[BURGESS] TO[TO] HIS[HIS] PARENTS PARENTS] | Smirna, Smirna, March March 10, 10, 1828 1828 I I am am afraid afraid you you will will think think I I have have let let slip slip a a very very long long time time without without writing writing but but since since my my last last our our affairs affairs wore wore such such a a gloomy gloomy and and uncertain uncertain aspect aspect that that I I had had no no * *NOTE: Nore: The The letters letters are are arranged arranged chronologically chronologically as as follows: follows: To To and and from from Charles Charles Burgess; Burgess; to to and and from from Edward Edward Burgess. Burgess. Letters Letters relating relating to to either either brother, brother, though though not not part part of of their their correspondcorrespond ence, ence, are are inserted inserted in in their their chronological chronological places. places. 

## Google

<!-- page 5 -->

## 354 354 THE THE NEW NEW YORK YORK PUBLIC PUBLIC LIBRARY LIBRARY 

heart heart to begin. to begin. In In fact fact I I scarcely scarcely knew knew which which way way fate fate would would lead lead me, me, and and began began to to entertain entertain serious ideas serious ideas of of turning turning Turk Turk that that I I might might have have no no trouble trouble in in entering entering into into futurity, futurity, but but quietly quietly smoking smoking my my pipe pipe might might leave leave every every earthly earthly care care to to God God His His prophet. prophet. However However I I am am rejoiced rejoiced to to say say that that the the clouds clouds are are now now disappearing disappearing and and I I can, can, with with some some degree degree of of comfort, comfort, sit sit down down to to let let you you into into my my future future movements. movements. — I I have have before before mentioned mentioned Sadik Sadik Bey’s Bey's departure departure from from Constantinople. Constantinople. — Mr. Mr. Fowler’s Fowler's coming coming down down to to Smirna Smirna after after we we had had been been together together some some weeks, weeks, every every body body and and every every thing thing led led us us to to think think that that nothing nothing could could prevent prevent a a war war between between the the three three powers powers and and Turkey.! Turkey.1 The The news news from from Persia Persia was was of of the the worst worst description. description. We We heard heard of of nothing nothing but but the the Russians Russians gaining gaining victories, victories, making making advances advances etc. etc. all all of of which which you you have have of of course course seen seen and and I I need need not not here here enter enter into. into. We We anticipated anticipated nothing nothing but[but] being being obliged obliged to leave[to][leave] Smirna Smirna and and going going God God only only knew[knew] whither,[whither,] our our proceeding proceeding to to Persia Persia appeared appeared for for the the present present impossible. impossible. We We heard heard nothing nothing from from Sadik Sadik Bey Bey who who promised promised to to write write from from Erzeroum, Erzeroum, the the bad bad state state of of the the Roads, Roads, dreadful dreadful weather, weather, the the unsettled unsettled political political events events between between Russia Russia and and Persia, Persia, the the former former of of whom whom was was said said to to be be in in possession possession of of all all the the passes, passes, the the great great danger danger from from Koords Koords and and other other bandits,[bandits,] and and his his bad bad state[state] of of health health made made us us have have every every fear fear for for his his safety. safety. Indeed Indeed the the Pacha Pacha of of Erzeroum Erzeroum the the frontier frontier town town of of Turkey Turkey would would not not allow allow travellers travellers to to proceed proceed therefore therefore we we had had the the greatest greatest doubt doubt of of Sadik Sadik Bey’s Bey's reaching reaching his his destination. destination. He He desired desired us us to to remain remain quiet quiet for for three three months months in in which which time time he he hoped hoped to to send send us us the the money money and and make make every every arrangement arrangement necessary necessary for for the the journey. journey. It It is is now now exactly three exactly three months months since since his his departure departure and and we we have have heard heard nothing nothing from from him, him, therefore therefore have have concluded concluded that that I I should should set set out out alone alone for for Persia Persia which which is is now now practicable practicable as as the the Russians Russians have have agreed agreed to to the the terms terms of of a a peace peace and and to to all all appearances appearances there there is is no no danger danger of of a a war war between between Turkey Turkey and and England.? England.2 I I apply apply here[here] for for a[a] Teskeret[Teskeret] to to proceed proceed to to Constantinople Constantinople from from whence whence I I get get my my firman firman to to go go on, on, every every body body here here appears appears to to think think I I shall shall get get permission permission to to proceed. proceed. We We have have decided decided on on this this step step with[with] the[the] concurrence concurrence of of Mr. Mr. Hanson Hanson who who decidedly decidedly considers considers it it the the most most practical practical way way of of acting. acting. In In case case of of Sadik Sadik Bey’s Bey's death,[death,] which which God God forbid,[forbid,] it it is is necessary necessary to to wind wind up up his his affairs affairs and and no no body body can can do do this this better better than than Fowler Fowler or or myself. myself. Should Should he he be be well well he he will will be be delighted delighted to to hear hear the the present present state state of of affairs affairs and and I I shall shall bring bring information information which which it it is is impossible impossible he he can can procure procure from any from any other other source, source, as as all all communication communication has has been been 1 1 The The Holy Holy Alliance Alliance (England, (England, France, France, and and Russia) Russia) were were threatening threatening to to intervene intervene actively actively in in the the Greek Greek war war of of independence. independence. 

2 2 The The Russo-Persian Russo-Persian War War was was brought brought to to an an end end by by the the Treaty Treaty of of Turkomanchai, Turkomanchai, in in February, February, 1828. 1828. This This left left Russia, Russia, who who had had assumed assumed the the role role of of protector protector of of Christianity, Christianity, with with her her hands hands free free for for her her war war with with Turkey. Turkey. 

## Google

<!-- page 6 -->

THE THE BURGESS BURGESS PERSIAN PERSIAN LETTERS LETTERS 355 355 

— 

stopped stopped and and all all he[he] will will have have learnt[learnt] can can only only be be from from vague vague reports reports of of the the amam bassadors bassadors having having left left and and which which must must be be calculated calculated to to deter deter him him from from acting acting with with regard regard to to his his property property under under my my charge, charge, the the goods goods are are perfectly perfectly safe safe and and in in good good condition. condition. They They are are shipped shipped in[in] my my name[name] on[on] board[board] an[an] English English vessel[vessel] floating floating in in this this bay. bay. 

It It is is very very important important Sadik Sadik Bey Bey should should know know the the turn turn affairs affairs have have taken taken as as this this must must decide decide his his future future movement. movement. I I shall shall also also be be the the bearer bearer of of very very important important news news such such as as the the change change of of ministry ministry and and there there is is also also a a strong strong report report of of the the king’s king's death.* death.3 We We shall shall know know more more however however by by the the next next post post which which we we expect expect daily. daily. I[I] set[set] out[out] 2[2] or[or] 3[3] days days after[after] its[its] arrival.[arrival.] My My own[own] prospects prospects are[are] in[in] any any case[case] not not bad bad —[—] the the late late war war must must have have made made the the Persians Persians fully fully aware aware of the of the necessity necessity of of employing employing British British officers officers and and should should all all be be well well with with Sadik Sadik Bey Bey my my interest interest is is as as good good as as it it possibly possibly can can be. be. If If he he is is lost lost to to us us I I have have no no doubt doubt Major Major Harte Harte and and the the English English gentlemen gentlemen will will consider consider favourably favourably of of my my case. case. I I have have seen seen here here a a gentleman gentleman who who has has been been in in Persia Persia and and whose whose accounts accounts are are most most flattering. flattering. I I think think it it very very possible possible I I shall shall have have another another journey journey back back again again to to assist assist in in getting getting in in the the goods goods which which will will be[be] an an affair affair of considerable of considerable difficulty difficulty as as they they can can not not in in any any case case proceed proceed until until we we have have heard heard from from the the Persian Persian government government who who must must apply apply to to the the Porte Porte for for a a remission remission of of duties, duties, leave leave to to pass pass etc. etc. I I have have a a good good deal deal of of difficulty difficulty to to look look forward forward to to in in my my travels travels not not to to mention mention the the unpleasantunpleasant ness ness of of being being a a month month without without seeing seeing a a Christian Christian face face or or speaking speaking a a European European language. language. I I expect expect to[to] set[set] out[out] from[from] here[here] in[in] four[four] or[or] five[five] days, days, it[it] is[is] uncertain[uncertain] whether whether by by land[land] or[or] sea,[sea,] should[should] I[I] find[find] a[a] good Dutch good[Dutch] ship ship going going up up I[I] will[will] go go with[with] her. her. You You now now have have a a rough rough sketch sketch of of my my prospects prospects and and probable probable proceedings, proceedings, I I will will proceed proceed to to give give you you some some idea idea of of Smirna Smirna and and the the way way in in which which I I have have spent spent my my time time here. here. The The town town of of Smirna Smirna is is situated situated on on a a most most beautiful beautiful bay bay and and surrounded surrounded by by fine[fine] bold[bold] mountains[mountains] itself itself being being in in the the valley valley and and stretching stretching along along the the sea sea shore. shore. During During the the winter winter these these mountains mountains were were covered covered with with snow snow and and the the cold cold was was severe. severe. The The town town is is badly badly and and irregularly irregularly built, built, there there is is only only one one street street in in it it which which will will allow allow of of a a carriage carriage to to pass. pass. It It is is very very dirty dirty and and altogether altogether disagreedisagree able able after after European European cities cities but but the the country country is is delightful delightful and and there there are are a a vast vast many many pleasant pleasant villages villages which which are are partly partly inhabited inhabited by by Turks Turks partly partly by by Greeks Greeks and and the the shooting shooting is is capital. capital. We We go go out out for for two two or or three days, three days, take take provisions provisions with us with us and and live live in in one one of of the the Greek Greek houses houses and and seldom seldom fail fail to to bring bring home home a a large large quantity quantity of of woodcocks, woodcocks, partridges partridges and and hares. hares. I I was was once once out out on on a a similar similar excursion excursion with with Fowler Fowler and and a a Lieutenant Lieutenant of of the the Cambrian. Cambrian. We We went went to to Lidigin Lidigin a a beautiful beautiful village village distant distant by by four four hours hours from from Smirna Smirna when when there there we we recollected recollected we we were were on on the the road road to to the the far far famed famed Ephesus Ephesus 3 3 Fath Path Ali Ali Shah, Shah, king king of of Persia. Persia. The The rumor rumor was was false; false ; the the Shah Shah did not did not die die until until 1834. 1834. 

## Google

<!-- page 7 -->

## 356 356 THE THE NEW NEW YORK YORK PUBLIC PUBLIC LIBRARY LIBRARY 

(with (with the[the] sacred[sacred] history[history] of[of] which[which] you[you] are[are] better[better] acquainted[acquainted] than than I I am) am) and and all all at at once once we we determined determined to to proceed proceed thither. thither. We We applied applied to to the the Aga Aga for for a a man man as as guide guide and and guard guard which which he he very very kindly kindly gave gave us us and and started started the the next next morning morning two two hours hours before before daylight daylight being being altogether altogether 5 5 in in company. company. After After a a long long and and painful painful days days march march at at first first through through low low marshy marshy ground ground and and after after over over high high and and picturesque picturesque mountains mountains we we arrived arrived at at a a miserable miserable Turkish Turkish village village 2 2 hours hours distant distant from from Ephesus. Ephesus. There There we we took took up up our our boots boots for for the the night night — — the the only only place place we we could could get get was was a a compartment compartment of of a a stable stable the the roof roof of of which which was was in in such such a a state state that that we we had had the the gratification gratification of of counting counting the the stars stars as as we we lay lay down down and and the the door door half half off off added added to to which which half half a a dozen dozen camel camel drivers drivers were were our our companions. companions. Poor Poor Fowler Fowler was was dreadfully dreadfully deranged deranged by by all all this. this. However However after after getting getting over over the the night night we we set set out out for for the the ruins ruins which which to to my my companions companions comcom pletely pletely made made up up for for their their suffering suffering during during the[the] night, night, as as to to myself myself I I was was not not so so much much in in extatics extatics and and in in passing passing a a fine fine Basso Basso Relievo Relievo over over an an archway archway I I fired fired a a ball ball to to bring bring down down a a piece piece of of the the knee knee to to carry carry away. away. I I knocked knocked off off a a piece piece but but the the Antiquarians Antiquarians were were so so dreadfully dreadfully outraged outraged that that I I was was obliged obliged to to give give them them the the precious precious piece piece of of marble marble as as a a peace peace offering. offering. At At Ephesus Ephesus we we could could find find nothing nothing to to eat eat either either for for ourselves ourselves or or our our horses, horses, but but they they told told us us that that if if we we went went to to Lelan Lelan Miova Miova 4 4 hours hours distant distant over over the the mounmoun tains tains we we should should get get everything everything we we wanted. wanted. Thither Thither we we went went and and found found the the Turks Turks in in the the greatest greatest ferment ferment at at our our approach, approach, the the Consulate Consulate was was closed closed and and the the Consul Consul had had been been gone gone ever ever since since the the news news of of the the battle battle of of Navarin* Navarin4 and and there there was was not not a a Frank Frank in in the the place. place. With With much much trouble trouble we we persuaded persuaded a a Jew Jew Dragueman Dragueman to to let let us us into into the the empty empty Consulate Consulate and and sent sent a a man man to to the the Aga Aga to to say say we we were were Americans Americans who who wished wished to to stay stay there there that that night. night. He He answered answered we we might might remain remain in in the the ConCon sulate sulate that that night night but but he he advised advised us us to to depart depart by by daylight daylight in in the the morning, morning, and and to to take take a a different different route route as as he he could could not not answer answer for for the the intentions intentions of of his his people people with with regard regard to to us. us. We We thanked[thanked] him[him] and[and] started[started] in[in] the[the] morning morning at[at] 4[4] o’clock[o'clock] and and after after a a ride ride over over the the mountains mountains of of about about 16 hours 16 hours arrived arrived at at Lidigin, Lidigin, where where we we stopped stopped the the night night and and proceeded proceeded the the next next day day to to Smirna Smirna and and were were told told by by the the people people there there we we might might think think ourselves ourselves very very lucky lucky to to have have come come off off so so well well during during a a time time when when we we had had neither neither Ambassador Ambassador nor nor a a Consul Consul in in the the Turkish Turkish dominions. dominions. I I had had written written this this much much intending intending to to have have sent sent my my letter letter from from Smirna Smirna but but having having decided decided to to sail[sail] on[on] the[the] 12th[12th] on[on] board[board] a[a] Dutch[Dutch] ship ship I I determined determined to to send send it it from from Constantinople. Constantinople. I I will will merely merely now now inform inform you you that that I I arrived arrived here here [Con[Con stantinople] stantinople] safe safe on on March March 25th 25th after after a a delightful delightful passage, passage, that that I I have have found found here here a a Dr. Dr. Schultz, Schultz, a a professor professor in in the the employ employ of the of the French French government government who who has has 4 4 The The more more or or less less accidental accidental encounter encounter between between an an Allied Allied squadron squadron and and the the Turkish Turkish fleet fleet in in the the harbor harbor of of Navarino Navarino accomplished accomplished the the total total destruction destruction of of the the latter, latter, and and dealt dealt Turkish Turkish naval naval forces forces a a blow blow from from which which the the “Sick "Sick Man” Man" never never recovered. recovered. 

## Google

<!-- page 8 -->

THE THE BURGESS BURGESS PERSIAN PERSIAN LETTERS LETTERS 357 357 

agreed agreed to to be be my my travelling travelling companion companion and and we we shall shall set set off off as as soon soon as as possible possible probably probably by by the the Black[Black] Sea Sea to[to] Trebizonde[Trebizonde] and[and] thence[thence] to[to] Tabriz[Tabriz] by by land.[land.] My[My] com[com] panion panion is is a a fine fine young young professieur professieur I I like like him him much. much. I I have have been been kindly kindly received received by by both both the the Dutch Dutch and and Austrian Austrian ambassadors ambassadors and and by by all[all] the the English English merchants[merchants] here but[here][but] there[there] is[is] but[but] little[little] society, society, most[most] of the[of][the] people people having having left left for for the the present. present. We We appear appear perfectly perfectly secure secure here here I I have have been been over over all all Constantinople Constantinople and and the the surrounding surrounding country country in in company company with with an an Austrian Austrian officer officer and and Engineer. Engineer. I I must must leave leave description description for for my my next next letter letter which which I I shall shall send send by by the the next next post post which which leaves leaves about about the the same same time time as as we we expect expect to to do. do. I I sent sent by by the the Skylark Skylark Captn. Captn. Davis Davis bound bound from from Smirna Smirna to to London London a a small small present present for for all all of of you you which which I I hope hope you you will will accept rather accept rather as as coming coming from from Turkey Turkey than than for for the the value value of of the the things things contained. contained. There There are are 4 4 pairs pairs slippers slippers with with the the outer outer shoes shoes to to fit fit as as near near as as I I can can guess guess my my Father, Father, Edward, Edward, Joe Joe and and George, George, 6 6 common common Turkish Turkish purses purses and and one one of of a[a] better[better] kind[kind] and and 1 1 Doz Doz of of Oil Oil of of Roses Roses in in different different bottles bottles some some in in the the shape shape of of an an opera opera glass glass others others pipes pipes boots boots etc. etc. If If I I can can find find any any thing thing worth worth sending sending here here I I will will procure procure it. it. Since Since writing writing the the above above we we have have had had the the insurpassable insurpassable pleasure pleasure to to receive receive a a kind kind letter letter from from Sadik Sadik mentioning mentioning his his arrival arrival and and that that if if possible possible he he will will send send a a Tartar Tartar to to us us with with every every thing thing necessary necessary for for our our proceeding proceeding with with the the goods. goods. This This however however cannot cannot be be at at present present as as it it is is impossible impossible the the goods goods should should come come up up here[here] without[without] the presence[the] presence of[of] a[a] British[British] Ambassador[Ambassador] therefore therefore we we are of are of opinion opinion that that my my journey journey should should be be prosecuted. prosecuted. Sadik’s Sadik's letter letter is is full full of of good good hopes hopes and and kind kind sentiments. sentiments. God God grant grant they they may may be be fullfilled. fullfilled. In In Sadik’s Sadik's letter letter he he mentioned mentioned that that his his friends friends there there would would be be glad glad to to receive receive me me and and to to place place me me in in such such a a situation situation of of course course military military as as I I was was fitted fitted for. for. 

[SyEED [SYEED KHAN[KHAN] To[TO] HENRy[HENRY] BurcEss. BURGESS.] ] Constantinople, Constantinople, June June 10, 10, 1828 1828 I I had had only only time time to to offer offer you you a a hasty hasty postscript postscript to to Mr. Mr. Willsonnes Willsonnes Letter Letter by by the the last last post, post, but but fearing fearing it it might might not not be be sufficiently sufficiently explanatory explanatory respecting respecting your your son son Charles Charles I I beg beg to to repeat repeat that that part part of of it it which which relates relates to to his his military military appointappoint ment ment in in the the Persian Persian army army which which is is as as follows. follows. —[—] He He will will receive receive 18,000 18,000 piastres piastres per per ann. ann. as[as] Lieutenant,[Lieutenant,] House House in in Garrison Garrison and and Tents Tents in in Camp, Camp, Forage Forage for for three three Horses Horses all all the the Year Year round, round, Baggage Baggage to to be be carried carried and and a a Set Set of of Carpets. Carpets. He He will will also also get get 9000 9000 piastres piastres for for the the Expenses Expenses of of his his Journey Journey out, out, but but he he must must at at least least agree agree to[to] serve[serve] the[the] Prince’[Prince5] for[for] five[five] years years —[—] after[after] which which time[time] if if he[he] chooses chooses to to go go home, home, he he will will get get another another 9000 9000 piastres piastres to to take take him him home, home, to to make make all all this this sure sure I I had had procured procured a a Firmin Firmin for for him, him, which which I I have have enclosed enclosed in in a a Letter Letter to to him him to to await await his his arrival arrival at at Tabreez. Tabreez. I I shall shall be be very very happy happy if if this this proves proves satisfactory satisfactory both both 5 5 Abbas Abbas Mirza, Mirza, oldest oldest son son of of Fath Path Ali AH Shah. Shah. 

## Google

<!-- page 9 -->

## 358 358 THE THE NEW NEW YORK YORK PUBLIC PUBLIC LIBRARY LIBRARY 

to to him him and and yourself, yourself, and and I I have have no no doubt doubt he he will will acquit acquit himself himself to to the the entire entire satissatis faction faction of of the the Prince Prince as as well well as as to to Major Major Hart Hart under under whose whose immediate immediate care care he he will will be be placed. placed. I I find find that that he he left left Smyrna Smyrna on on the the 11th llth March March in in the the Dutch Dutch Brig Brig the the “King "King of of the the Netherlands” Netherlands" that that after after a a passage passage of of Six Six days days he he arrived arrived here here and and remained remained until until the the lst 1st of of May, May, being being four four days days before before my my arrival,[arrival,] when when ‘he •he went by went by Vessel Vessel up up the the Black Black Sea Sea to to Redoutculu Redoutculu on on his his way way to to Georgia Georgia from from thence thence his his way way is is very very clear clear to to Tabreez. Tabreez. Such Such is is the the Outline Outline of of his his History History to to that that time time of of which which he he has has no no doubt doubt given given you you full full Particulars,[Particulars,] which which I I hope hope reached reached you you in in due due course. course. Mr. Mr. Willsonne Willsonne will will have have communicated communicated to to you you the the particulars particulars of of my my Journey Journey to to and and from from Tabreez, Tabreez, which which saves saves me me the the RecapituRecapitu lating lating —[—] and and since since I I wrote wrote to to him him I I have have not not quite quite fixed fixed on on my my Plan Plan for for returning returning but but tis tis most most probable probable to to be be by by the the Black Black Sea. Sea. As As yet yet we we know know nothing nothing certain certain here here of the of the movements movements of of the the Russians Russians nor nor if if they they have have crossed crossed the the Danube Danube and and this this uncertainty uncertainty renders renders it it so so difficult difficult to to decide decide on on what what Route Route to to take. take. I I am am the the more more anxious anxious to to return return to to Tabreez Tabreez to to make make arrangements arrangements for for another another Journey Journey to to England England when when I I hope hope to to have have the the pleasure pleasure of of seeing seeing you you in in London. London. SEED SYEED Kuan, KHAN, late late Sapik SADIK Bey BEY ~ 

[Cares [[CHARLES] Burcess BURGESS To TO HENRY HENRY BurGEss. BURGESS. ] ] Tiflis, Tiflis, July July 3, 3, 1828 1828 You You will will be be surprized surprized at at the the date date of of this this letter letter as as my my last last was was from from ConstantiConstanti nople nople since since that that I I did did not not give give you you any any certain certain intelligence intelligence that that I I should should proceed proceed through through Russia Russia —[—] however however here here I I am am and and upon upon the the whole whole feel feel glad glad that that I I have have taken taken this this course course although although much much that that has has occurred occurred since since my my departure departure from from Constantinople Constantinople have have changed changed my my vision vision and and expectations expectations in in what what way way I I cannot cannot here here explain explain to to you you as as this this letter letter is is almost almost sure sure to to bee bee opened opened before before it it reaches reaches your your hands. hands. On On May May Ist 1st I I set set sail sail from from Constantinople Constantinople having having with with some some diffidiffi culty culty succeeded succeeded in[in] finding finding a[a] ship ship going going to[to] Taganrog Taganrog —[—] after[after] a a prosperous prosperous voyvoy age age of of 16[16] days days including including 6[6] quarantine quarantine I[I] landed[landed] at[at] the[the] lazarretto[lazarretto] in in Taganrog Taganrog where where I I had had still still 14 days 14 days to to remain remain in in confinement confinement on on shore. shore. When When I I left left ConCon stantinople stantinople it it was was with with the the intention intention of of landing landing at at Kertch Kertch in in the the Crimea Crimea from from thence thence embarking embarking for for Redout-kalé Redout-kale and and thence thence proceeding proceeding to to Tiflis Tiflis which which is is only only 5 5 days days journey, journey, on on arriving arriving at at Kertch Kertch I I found found there there was was little little chance chance of of my my getting getting an an opportunity opportunity to to proceed proceed by by sea sea to to Redoutkalé Redoutkale and and the the governor governor told told me me I I should should run run great great risk risk of of being being made made prisoner prisoner or or killed killed by by the the Mahometan Mahometan tribes tribes who who inhabit inhabit the the country country between between the the Black Black Sea Sea and and Tiflis Tiflis and and as as the the war war was was already already commenced commenced against against the the Turks Turks they they would would be[be] sure sure to to plunder plunder and and carry carry off off any any Christian Christian they they might might meet meet —[—] he he therefore therefore advised advised my my proceeding proceeding to to Taganrog Taganrog and from and from there there going going by by land land to to Tiflis, Tiflis, this this I I did did and and after after a a journey journey of of 20 20 days days arrived arrived here. here. 

## Google

<!-- page 10 -->

359 359 

## THE THE BURGESS BURGESS PERSIAN PERSIAN LETTERS LETTERS 

| | 

I I must must not not dwell dwell too too long long on on the the occurrences occurrences of of the the route route but but leave leave them them for for another another opportunity opportunity at at Tabreez Tabreez from from whence whence I I shall shall have have plenty plenty of of time time for for writing writing fully. fully. On On my my journey journey from from Taganrog Taganrog to[to] Tiflis Tiflis I I met[met] with with Major Major Willock Willock the the brother brother of of Sir Sir Henry Henry of of whom whom you you have have already already heard heard during during the the short short time time we we were were together together —this[—][this] gentleman gentleman shewed shewed me me every every possible possible kindness kindness and and certainly certainly the the information information I I received received from from him him does does not not diminish diminish my my hopes hopes of of doing doing well. well. Every Every body body I I have[have] seen[seen] here here praises praises in[in] the[the] highest highest degree degree the the conduct conduct of of the the English English throughout throughout the the war war[—] — the the Russian Russian officers officers who who have have been been at at Tabreez Tabreez all all speak speak with with the the utmost utmost gratitude gratitude of of the the reception reception they they have have met met with with from from the the English English indeed indeed from from all all sides sides I I have have heard heard the the same same opinion opinion respecting respecting my my countrymen countrymen there there —[—] this this you you may may suppose suppose is is no no small small satisfaction satisfaction to to me. me. The The round round I I have have been been obliged obliged to to make make by by way way of of Taganrok Taganrok has has cost cost me me much much more more than than if if I I had had prosecuted prosecuted my my intended intended route route by by way way of of Nimgraha Nimgraha and and here here I I am am under under the the necessity necessity of of purchasing purchasing horses horses to to take take me me to to Tabreez Tabreez as the posts which were disarranged by the war have not yet[been] reestablished. asIam I am the posts obliged obliged which to to purchas purchase wer **e** disarrangthree three hors horses **e** ds by and and the this this war together together have not with with yet the increased the been increased reestablished. expense expense of the journey has obliged me to draw on you hard. of theI I am am journey much much pressed pressed has obliged for for time time me to as as drawI I leave leave on you at at twelve twelve hard.oclock oclock to to night night it it is is now now eight. eight. The The weather weather is is so so hot hot it it is is impossible impossible to to travel travel in in the the day. day. I I have have for for companion companion as as far far as as Erivan Erivan a a young young Russian Russian officer officer nephew nephew of of the the famous famous Yermoloff® Yermoloff6 an an exceedingly exceedingly pleasant pleasant young young man man —[—] he he is is going going to to join join the the army army under under Pa[skePa[skevitch]” vitch]7 which which is is now now directed directed upon upon Erzeroum. Erzeroum. My My next next letter letter shall shall contain contain a a complete complete budget budget of of all all my my adventures adventures since since writing, writing, the the voyage voyage and and journey journey have have been been extremely extremely interesting interesting particularly particularly the the passage passage of of the the Caucasus Caucasus which which is is certainly certainly worth worth coming from coming from London London to to see. see. My My bill bill is[is] for for 45/6/3. 45/6/3. 

[CHARLES [CHARLES BURGESS[BURGESS] TO[TO] HIS[HIS] PARENTS. PARENTS.] ] Tabrees, July Tabreez, July 25, 25, 1828 1828 I I only only arrived arrived here here yesterday yesterday so so that that I I cannot cannot enter enter into into particulars. particulars. I I am am at at Major Major Hart’s Hart's who who is is certainly certainly one one of of the the finest finest samples samples of of a a true true English English officer officer I I ever ever beheld. beheld. If If he he was was my my Father Father he he could could not not be be kinder kinder to to me me than than he he is. is. Every Every body body here[here] has[has] received[received] me[me] well.[well.] Colonel Colonel Macdonald, Macdonald, Sir Sir Keith Keith Jackson Jackson and and all all the the officers officers have have called called and and offered offered their their kindest kindest attentions attentions to to me. me. Sadik Sadik Bey Bey left left here here for for Constantinople Constantinople in in April April and and as as it it appears appears has has contrived contrived to to pass pass his his goods goods through through Constantinople Constantinople and and is is now now on on his his way way to to Persia Persia[—] — he he writes writes 6 6 General General Alexei Alexei Petrovich Petrovich Yermoloff, Yermoloff, 1772-1861. 1772-1861. He He had had distinguished distinguished himself himself in in the the Battle Battle of of Borodino, Borodino, in in 1812, 1812, against against Napoleon, Napoleon, and and was was in in command command of of the the famous famous Caucasian Caucasian corps corps in in 1817. 1817. 7 7 Field Field Marshal Marshal Ivan Ivan Fiodorovich Fiodorovich Paskevich Paskevich (Paskiewicz), (Paskiewicz), Count Count of of Erivan, Erivan, Prince Prince of of WarWar saw, saw, 1782-1856. 1782-1856. 

## Google

<!-- page 11 -->

| 

## 360 360 THE THE NEW NEW YORK YORK PUBLIC PUBLIC LIBRARY LIBRARY 

| 

me me in in the the kindest kindest way way and and appears appears perfectly perfectly satisfied satisfied with with my my conduct. conduct. The The Prince Prince Abbas Abbas Mirza Mirza received received him him very very well well has has granted granted him him all all his his requests requests and and the the mines mines the the commerce commerce to to England England and and the the silk silk trade trade will will be be in in his his hands hands entirely entirely —[—] he he is is also also made made a[a] Khan. Khan. I I expect expect you you will will see[see] him him in in England England again again very very shortly. shortly. Should Should it it be be particularly particularly inconvenient inconvenient to to you you to to pay pay my my Tiflis Tiflis bill bill do do not not ) think think of of it it —[—] by by the the time time it it is is returned returned it it will will be be perfectly perfectly in in my my power power although although the the effect effect will will be be bad bad of of having having it it returned. returned. I I should should think think some some of of my my relations relations would would do do me me the the favour favour to to pay pay and and I I will will most most positively positively promise promise to to send send the the money money to to England England by by the the first first convenient convenient opportunity opportunity ... . . . I I would would have have sent sent the the money money by by Mr. Mr. Mackenzie Mackenzie the the gentleman gentleman who who is is kind kind enough enough to to take take charge charge of of this this but but it it is is impossible impossible I I can can receive receive it it until until I I have have been been presented presented to to the the Prince Prince who who will will not not return return from from Teheran Teheran for for twenty twenty days. days. But But do do not not by by this this suppose suppose that that I I am am not not authorized authorized to to call call myself myself a a Lieutenant Lieutenant in in his his services services this this I I am am perfectly perfectly I I have have his his own own signature signature to to the the agreement agreement in in Persian. Persian. I I have have now now a a commission commission to to beg beg of of you you to to perform perform on on the the part part of of Major Major Hart Hart his his little little son son Alexander Alexander who who is is with with his his brother brother is is not not yet yet placed placed at at school school the the Major Major has has not not the the highest highest confidence confidence in in his his brothers brothers (who (who is[is] a[a] great[great] discipli[discipli] narian) narian) judgment[judgment] in in this this matter. matter. Now Now he he wishes wishes you you to to inform inform me me of of the the best best schools schools you you know know of of[—] — the the Major Major wishes wishes him him to to be[be] placed placed where where he he can can have have the the best best possible possible education education and and more more liberty liberty than than boys boys generally generally have have at at schools, schools, for for example example he he would would like like him him to to have have a a horse horse or or pony pony to to be be allowed allowed to to ride ride out out and and above above all all to to be be perfectly perfectly instructed instructed in in this this art art which which in in Persia Persia is is of of the the first first importance. importance. Religion Religion is is of of no no importance importance that that is is to to say say of the of the sect sect of of the the master. master. I I proposed proposed Dr.[Dr.] Morrell[Morrell] should should he he still still keep keep school school or or if if not not where where my my brother brother Joe Joe was was at at Liverpool. Liverpool. He He appeared appeared to to like like the the idea idea of of Dr. Dr. Morrell Morrell extremely extremely and and I I hope hope you you will will inquire inquire if if he he has has retired retired altogether altogether or or not. not. 

You You may may suppose suppose the the march march from from Tiflis Tiflis to to Tabreez Tabreez in in the the middle middle of of July July was was not not the the pleasantest ride pleasantest ride in in the the world world —[—] my my nose nose and and cheeks cheeks were were completely completely raw raw with with the the sun sun before before I I got here got here but but as as to to health health I I never never felt felt stronger stronger or or better better in in my my life. life. The The gentlemen gentlemen here her.e lead[lead] most[most] temperate temperate active[active] lives[lives] that[that] is[is] to[to] say say Major Major Hart Hart Dr. Dr. Cormick and Cormick and Major Major Willock. Willock. You You must must send send your your letter letter for for the the present present until until Turkish Turkish affairs affairs are[are] arranged arranged by by way way of of St. St. Petersburgh Petersburgh you you will will not not find find any any difficulty difficulty in in getting getting some some of of the the Petersburgh Petersburgh merchants merchants to to take take charge charge of of them them there[there] and[and] they they must[must] be[be] there[there] enclosed[enclosed] and[and] forwarded under forwarded under cover cover to to Mr. Mr. Le Le Chevalier Chevalier de de Gamba Gamba Consul Consul de de France France a a Tiflis Tiflis who who has has kindly kindly prom promised ised to to take take charge charge of of any any letters letters for for me. me. - Should Should you you see see Capt. Capt. Hart Hart do do not not mention mention anything anything about about the the school school the the Major Major is is willing to willing to pay pay for for school school expenses expenses only only from from 100 100 to to 140£ 140£ pr. pr. ann. arm. 

## Google

<!-- page 12 -->

THE THE BURGESS BURGESS PERSIAN PERSIAN LETTERS LETTERS 361 361 [CHARLES BuRGESS [CHARLES[BURGESS] TO[TO] HIS[HIS] PARENTS. PARENTS.] ] Camp Camp two two days days march march from from Tabreez Tabreez September September 13, 13, 1829 1829 Just Just 20[20] months[months] ago[ago] I[I] wrote[wrote] you[you] a[a] letter[letter] in[in] which[which] I[I] mentioned[mentioned] all all my my affairs affairs as as settled settled and and myself myself as as established established in in the the Princes Princes service, service, this this turned turned out out very very differently. differently. When When the the Prince Prince returned returned from from a a journey journey to to Teheran Teheran his his affairs affairs were were in in a a very very bad bad state state the the debt debt to to the the Russians® Russians8 in in a a great great measure measure unpaid unpaid and and the the regular regular army army could not could not that that year year be be collected. collected. Under Under these these circumstances circumstances he decided he decided upon upon not not accepting accepting us us and and broke broke his his agreements agreements and and every every thing thing else, else, notwithstanding notwithstanding the the repeated repeated remonstrances remonstrances of of Major Major Hart, Hart, the the Ambassador Ambassador etc. etc. At At this this time time there there came came to to Tabreez Tabreez a a Coordish Coordish Pacha Pacha whose whose country country lies lies midway midway between between Tabreez Tabreez and and Bagdad, Bagdad, he he wishing wishing to to introduce introduce discipline discipline into into his his army army applied applied for for us us and and we we entered entered into into an an agreement agreement with with him, him, that that is is to to say say a a Mr. Mr. Christian Christian nephew nephew of of Dr. Dr. Cormick Cormick and and myself myself and and started started with with him him for for his his country country Sulimanieh, Sulimanieh, during during this this time time I I particularly particularly avoided avoided writing writing to to you you as as the the country country I I was was placed placed in in is is considered considered dangerous dangerous for for Franks Franks even even to to pass pass through through and and I I did did not not wish wish you you to to be be under under unnecessary unnecessary alarms, alarms, and and hoped hoped and and believed believed I I should should soon soon return return to to the the Princes Princes service service which which has has eventually eventually turned turned out out to to be be the the case. case. We We served served Mahmoud Mahmoud Pacha Pacha for for a a period period of of nine nine months months much much to to his his satisfaction satisfaction and and were were treated treated by by him him like like his his own own sons, sons, at at the the end end of of this this time time while while the the Pacha Pacha and and ourselves ourselves were were out out engaged engaged in in a a war war with with the the Rewandoos Rewandoos a a neighbouring neighbouring people people his his brother brother Governor Governor of of the the country country during during his his absence absence became became a a traitor traitor and and with with the the assistance assistance of of an an army army from from Bagdad Bagdad succeeded succeeded in in turning turning him him out out of of his his country, country, and and we we all all came came together together to to the the Prince Prince Abbas Abbas Mirza Mirza encamped encamped here. here. I I was was particularly particularly well well received, received, was was told told he he had had heard heard an an excellent excellent character character of of me, me, and and desired desired my my services, services, to to which which I I of of course course assented assented and and am am now now if if no no new new misfortune misfortune takes takes place place in in his his service service but but he he has has cheated cheated us us in in pay pay which which he he has has docked docked down down in in pay pay from from 500 500 to to 400 400 tomauns tomauns pleading pleading the the distressed distressed state state of of finances finances and and promising promising after after a a year year to to increase increase us. us. If If this this lasts lasts I I am am satisfied. satisfied. We We are are now now in in a a camp camp with with 7000 7000 disciplined disciplined troops troops artillery artillery etc. etc. gaining gaining much much useful useful information information and and satisfied satisfied that that in in this this country country with with great great industry industry and and application application there there is is every every probability probability of of ultimately ultimately doing doing something. something. I I now now speak speak the the language language fluently, fluently, have have travelled travelled much, much, been been in in many many dangers dangers and and difficulties difficulties from from which which I I have have happily happily escaped escaped with with an an unimpaired unimpaired constitution constitution and and although although severely severely wounded wounded some some time time back back now now completely completely recovered. recovered. From From Coordistan Coordistan we we thought thought ourselves ourselves happy happy to to get get off off with with our our necks necks whole whole and and our our little little stock stock of of money, money, leaving leaving all all our our other other baggage baggage to[to] the[the] conquerors. conquerors. I[I] of[of] course[course] have[have] many[many] long[long] stories[stories] to[to] tell[tell] of[of] adven[adven] tures tures but but now now have have not not a[a] moment moment to to spare. spare. I I will will now now write[write] constantly constantly pray pray let let 8 8 The The war war indemnity indemnity imposed imposed by by the the victorious victorious Russians. Russians. 

## Google

<!-- page 13 -->

## 362 362 THE THE NEW NEW YORK YORK PUBLIC PUBLIC LIBRARY LIBRARY 

me me hear hear from from you you as as often often as as possible. possible. I I cannot cannot express express my my anxiety anxiety to to know know how how the the family family is is situated. situated. Sadik Sadik Bey Bey now now Seyd Seyd Khan Khan is is on on his his way way to to England England after after deceiving deceiving me me and and subsequently subsequently treating treating me me very very badly badly do do not not believe believe one one word word he he says says either either about about Persia Persia or or anything anything else. else. Mr. Mr. Fowler Fowler who who is is with with him him will will tell tell you you the the truth, truth, every every body body here here is is disgusted disgusted with with Sadik Sadik and and I I expect expect his his character character is is already already public public in in England England but but you you need need not not take take any any conspicuous conspicuous part part in in making making him him known known unless unless asked, asked, I I have have reasons reasons which which I I will will explain explain hereafter. hereafter. I I am am afraid afraid you you will will not not be be able to able to read read this this I I am am writing writing sitting sitting crossed crossed legged legged and and in in a[a] tremendous tremendous storm storm of of wind wind and and rain rain which which blows blows my my paper paper in in all all directions. directions. Col. Col. Monteith Monteith who who takes takes charge charge of of this this goes goes through through Russia Russia and and I I must must finish finish as as he he leaves leaves immediately. immediately. 

(To (To be[be] continued)[c,i,i][ tinned)] 

**==> picture [9 x 12] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
€<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## Google